“Bad Boys" tries with all the energy at its command toredeem an exhausted story with sheer technique. This movie is so good-lookingit deserves a decent screenplay, instead of one more lope down memory lane. Themovie gives us a Miami filled with midnight glitz, shot with the flair of afashion photographer - backlit monochrome tilt shots and all. It has relentlessediting, slick action sequences, and blows up stuff real good. Butwhat is it about? Two cops. Buddies. Partners. Narcs.Whoseevidence from a $100 million heroin bust is stolen. Who get in trouble with thechief, who yells at them. And with a chick from Internal Affairs, who takesthem off the case. And who pick up a sexy, wisecracking sidekick along the way.Oh, and one of the cops is a sexy bachelor and the other one is a family man.The plot is like a jigsaw puzzle with pieces supplied by "48 HRS,""Internal Affairs," "Beverly Hills Cop" and "LethalWeapon." The movie is a production of Don Simpson and Jerry Bruckheimer,who actually made several of the movies they've ripped off, including"Beverly Hills Cop" parts one and two, so maybe they're recycling. Ormaybe they thought the chemistry of their actors would make everything seemfresh.Themovie stars Martin Lawrence and Will Smith, both comic actors, both talented,both allowed to talk way too much in the course of this film. The dialogue runson endlessly; consider, for example, the basic scene where the commandingofficer reads out the two cops. He goes on, and on, and on, screaming at them.Later he screams some more.Thereare also a lot of curious interludes in which Lawrence and Smith do verbalriffs, interrupting each other, stream of consciousness, finishing each other'ssentences or not bothering to complete thoughts at all, to show a kind of easyfamiliarity, I guess. We are glad they know each other so well. We wish we knewthem well enough to figure out what they think they're saying.Theplot: A criminal mastermind (Tcheky Karyo) engineers the theft of $100 millionin heroin from the evidence locker at police headquarters. Lawrence and Smithare assigned to the case.Smithasks Theresa (Theresa Randle), a hooker he knows, to keep an eye open for highrollers. Sure enough, she gets a call from a guy who's sky-high on drugs andwants to spend $2,000. She asks her friend Julie (Tea Leoni) to tag along.Julie isn't a hooker but, what the heck, the guy's so out of it they'll be backon the street with the dough in 15 minutes.Theresagets murdered, in an ugly, unpleasant scene. Julie witnesses it all, andcontacts the cops. There is an ungainly subplot in which Lawrence, the familyman, has to pretend to be Smith, the bachelor, and live for a few days withJulie, while meanwhile his wife gets suspicious, etc. This stuff isn't evenrecycled from old action movies; it's out of those Idiot Plots where peopledon't catch on to anything.Forexample, why is Lawrence's apartment filled with photographs of Smith? IsLawrence gay? Is Smith his boyfriend? He comes up with a sitcom-style excuse,to conceal the fact that they are actually in Smith's apartment. Unasked andunanswered is why Smith would have his apartment filled only with photos ofhimself. The answer, of course, is that the photos are there to support thevacuum-brained dialogue.Thereare a lot of photos in this movie, if you get my drift.Theclimax is ideal for those with attention-span deficit.Thatway they won't know they've seen similar climaxes hundreds of times before.This one is shot well, with good special effects, but takes all the usualshortcuts, including the Fallacy of the Talking Killer.Imagine.Bodies are stacking up like cordwood. Propane tanks are exploding. A bad guyappears in the doorway of a plane. He's aiming his automatic weapon at one ofthe heroes. All he has to do is pull the trigger. And then, what? He talks?Nope, the good guy talks, finding time to say, "You forgot your boardingpass," before pulling the trigger. By then, of course, he should have beendead, but the filmmakers violate credibility to give us a smart remark that isnot believable, funny or original. Whom do they make these movies for? Whatexercise in self-deception inspires them to go to such effort and expense forwhat is obviously going to be a lame exercise in retreadmanship?
