"Bed of Roses" tells a sappy story about two sad sackswho get more or less what they deserve - each other. It's one of those weepersthat might have made sense in the 1930s, with big stars to let us know it wasonly kidding. But I'm afraid this movie is very serious about its romance,which is so earnest and sweet that I kept hoping at least one of the loverswould turn out to be a slasher. Thefilm opens with a day in the life of Lisa (Mary Stuart Masterson), a top-levelexecutive whose private life is empty despite the presence (or more often theabsence) of a boyfriend. Both of them are workaholics, making it convenient togo with a person who has no time for them. One day Lisa gets some news: A mannamed Stanley has died in Philadelphia. On the same day, she receives amysterious delivery of flowers, from an anonymous admirer.Welearn more about Stanley later: He was Lisa's abusive adoptive father, whoreared her after she was abandoned at an airport. Stanley's wife died soonafter the adoption; Lisa is a woman with more missing parents than most. (Thereis even a flashback to little Lisa asking the drunken, sullen Stanley,"When's my birthday?" and him growling, "You don't have abirthday.") Back to the present. Who are the flowers from? Shecross-examines the deliveryman, named Lewis (Christian Slater). He claims toknow nothing, but later confesses the flowers are from him.Hetakes long walks at night, you see, to try to forget the pain of his wife andchild having died, and one day he saw her standing in her window, and fell inlove. Oh, and he owns the florist shop.Lisaand Lewis are both almost bent with the weight of their misfortunes, but theybegin to date, and the progress of their relationship is charted by Lisa's bestfriend, Kim (Pamela Segall), who is one of those convenient characters put intomovies so the heroine will have someone to talk to while providing innermost thoughts that otherwise would have togo into voice-over narration.(Atleast Segall brings bright energy to the role; we have a feeling that if theflowers had been delivered to Kim she would have had better things to do thanspend three days trying to find out who sent them.) Far be it from me to revealwhat happens as the romance progresses. But I'm serious about thinking one ofthem would turn out to be a dangerous nut. Usually, in modern movies, romanticsetups like this are played so straight only when a nasty surprise is going topop up later (see "Fatal Attraction").Ishe too good to be true? Does her moody exterior conceal dangerous aberrations?Alas, no. The movie hinges on that most reliable of modern romantic clichés,the Fear of Commitment. How can she commit to romance when she has been abusedby Stanley and grown up to be a workaholic? And how can he commit, when he isafraid all will end in disaster, as it did with his first wife? Just to giveyou a sample of the movie's goofiness, the two of them spend their first datedelivering flowers. See, even though Lewis owns the shop, he likes to deliverthe flowers himself, just to see people's faces light up when they receivethem. What a sensitive guy.Theactors are wasted on this material, which moves forward with gravedeliberation. Mary Stuart Masterson, who specializes in spunk and fortitude,doesn't seem right as an unfocused, self-pitying loser. And Christian Slater isbetter as a cool, laconic outsider than as a dreamer with a song in his heart.Maybe one reason they seem unconvincing is that the story lays it on so thick;they're buried by the material.
