“Daylight” is the cinematic equivalent of a golden oldiesstation, where you never encounter anything you haven't grown to love over theyears. It stars Sylvester Stallone as a disgraced former chief of the rescueservice, who happens to be on the spot when an explosion rips through theHolland Tunnel, sealing both ends and trapping the usual assortment ofcharacter actors in the middle. Stallone may have lost a few men in theemergency that got him canned, but he, and only he, knows how to save thoselives. Everygroup of trapped civilians always includes one hothead who wants to takecommand, one tearful child, one bickering couple, one heroic guard, a few badguys who turn out to be good guys, and, yes, one dog. The mommy in one familyhelpfully reads a description of the tunnel aloud, so her family can appreciatethe experience they are having, and we can get information crucial to the plot.Thesetup: three trucks loaded with toxic waste head into the tunnel from Manhattanto New Jersey. They are soon followed by crazed diamond thieves, whose decisionto evade police pursuit by driving into the tunnel is not one of your brightercriminal plans. They crash their car into the waste trucks, causing an inferno.Themovie then pays homage to the special effects cliché of the year, the VisiblyApproaching Fireball. The best science available informs us that an explosionexpands too quickly to be seen at close quarters--but not in the movies, wherethe occupants of cars have time to see the approaching fireball, scream andduck behind the dashboard. Presumably the fireball is super-hot and consumesall of the oxygen available, although luckily it is not quite hot enough tomelt the cast, which is left with “enough air for three hours.” Hello! *Threehours* of air? I eagerly started looking for a red digital readout clock thatwould count down the minutes and seconds. All disaster movies have one. “Daylight,”alas, doesn't supply a digital readout for the potential asphyxias. But it hasseveral in a crucial sequence where Stallone has to enter the tunnel bylowering himself through a series of four giant exhaust fans. (The fans can beshut down for 60 seconds, but not simultaneously, and only once; not a veryflexible capability, eh?) Stallone has a limited number of seconds to dropthrough the blades of each one before it starts spinning again. And what'sinstalled on the wall next to *every one* of the four fans? A nice big reddigital readout clock, that's what--which tells how many seconds until Stallonegets sliced and diced. (The digital clocks were presumably installed by thesame spendthrifts who provided emergency lighting in all areas of the tunnelthat are sealed off so nobody can enter them.) Once into the tunnel, Stallonedeals with the usual Trapped Civilian Character Dilemmas. A few of thecharacters are interesting. I liked Stan Shaw, as the tunnel guard who keeps acool head (although early in the picture, I knew he was making a big mistakewhen he promised his girlfriend, “I'll give you that bracelet tonight”). ViggoMortensen has some juicy moments as a business tycoon and hero mountainclimber, who always travels with his equipment and announces a plan to climb upa tunnel filled with risky debris. (I knew he was making a big mistake when hepromised Stallone, “I *cannot* fail.”) Stallone is good, too, in a thanklessrole. At one point, when a trapped civilian asks him if they have a chance, Iexpected him to say, “Calm down, lady. I've done this in a dozen other movies.”After the explosion and the fire comes a flood. And a lot of rats. This is thekind of movie where when one rat turns up in an early scene, you know a lotmore rats will turn up later. And when they do, your onboard movie computerstarts humming, and you successfully predict that if there's an escape routeanywhere in the tunnel, those rats will know it.Theonly bad guys in the movie are the city officials, who set up a command postand seem to feel it is extremely urgent that they blow up the tunnel before anypossible survivors have a chance of escaping. Unwise as this would be, it palesbeside the speech of a city official who nixes the plan: “That tunnel is anartery! Do you think you can try to redirect half a million people in and outof the city!” Say what? Does she think the tunnel is still usable, now thatboth ends have collapsed and there are fires, floods and rats in the middle?New York commuters are masochists, sure, but I don't think many of them aregoing anywhere near that artery again until they see Mayor Giuliani havingbreakfast with Regis and Kathie Lee right there on the double center line.
