“Disturbing Behavior” is a small-town horror movie with anironic flip-flop: This time, a sinister local cult takes rebels and delinquentsand turns them into clean-cut models of deportment. “You still think this isabout blood drives and bake sales?” one of the kids whispers fearfully, as theyeavesdrop on a secret meeting where citizens are planning bake sales and blooddrives. The kid is named Gavin, and he's the whistle-blower, the one kidin school who knows what's going on. In the movie's best scene, he gives Steve,the newcomer, a guided tour of the various factions in the lunchroom: thedopers, the brains, the car crowd ... and the Blue Ribbons, who wear letterjackets and have trim haircuts and always exhibit exemplary behavior.It's the Blue Ribbons who are the dangerous ones, Gavin knows.Smoking some weed in the forest by the hydroelectric plant, he witnessed one ofthem break a girl's neck and shoot a cop--and then saw the cop's partner letthe killer go. From his vantage point, Gavin was unable to see the evil redglow in the killer kid's eyes, but obviously, these are dangerous people.The cult members hate all forms of rebellion. The reason thegirl had to die was that she had a tattoo. “Self-mutilation,” says her killer,who refuses sex because he has to “conserve his fluids” for the big game, andlater utters the very worst line in the movie: “Self-mutilate this, fluid girl!”Gavin is played by Nick Stahl. James Marsden is Steve, the newcomer, and KatieHolmes (from “Dawson's Creek”) is Rachel, who dresses in black and likes tostrike poses on the beds of pickup trucks and is a bad girl who is in greatdanger of becoming a very good one. Meanwhile, down in the school basement, thejanitor (William Sadler) has what Gavin describes as “the village idiot,Quasimodo thing going.” But is the janitor quite what he seems? Teenage horrormovies are a popular genre after “Scream” and “Scream 2,” but I doubt this onehas similar success. It's too murky and disorganized. The director, DavidNutter, has done some “X-Files” episodes, and is great at suggestingconspiracies but not so good at payoffs. It's like he wants to postpone theanswers until the end of the season.But we catch on fairly quickly that this is, as the advance buzzhas it, a teenage version of “The Stepford Wives.” The Blue Ribbons, with theirWeekend Enlightenment Seminars, are, as Gavin says, “hypnotized, lobotomizedand brainwashed.” And there's the obligatory element of scheming parents, whodouble-cross their kids: They'd rather have a polite zombie than a sullenrebel.Unlike “Scream 2,” which kids the horror cliches, “DisturbingBehavior” pretends they still hold power. But the movie is light on shocks andnot ever scary. It does, however, find a great way to illustrate Pink Floyd'simmortal line, “Hey! Teacher! Leave those kids alone!”
