“Grumpier Old Men" takes us back to Wabasha, Minn., which Ithink of as Grumpyville because most of the residents appear to be grumpy oldmen, just as most of the residents of Mickeyville are mice. The two leadinglocal grumps are John and Max (Jack Lemmon and Walter Matthau), who areneighbors in houses so close that when the blinds are up (as they usually are),they can not only eavesdrop on each other but also even videotape what'shappening next door. Oneof the peculiarities of their neighborhood in Grumpyville is that beautiful,sex-starved women are constantly moving in. In "Grumpy Old Men"(1993), Ann-Margret became their new neighbor. She apparently was unable tofind any eligible bachelors in the entire town (or state), except for Matthauand Lemmon, and ended up, as you will recall, marrying Lemmon.Matthauremains a bachelor, morose and peppy, still going fishing every day, but boy,is his luck about to change: Sophia Loren moves into the neighborhood. She'sopening an Italian ristorante in the building formerly occupied by Chuck's BaitShop, and the grumps don't like that, because her customers will scare away thefish. So they play a series of tricks on her, like sticking up detour signs soher customers will get lost and surrounding her parking lot with those yellowstreamers that say "Police Line - Do Not Cross." The movie's subplotsinvolve Daryl Hannah as Melanie, John's daughter, and Kevin Pollak as Jacob,Max's son. They got engaged in the previous picture and now the Grumps areplanning their wedding and reception, which will mostly take place, it appears,in saloons and bait shops.Alsoon hand is 95-year-old Grandpa Gustafson (Burgess Meredith, at 87), who seemsto live forever on his strict regime: bacon for breakfast, bacon sandwiches forlunch and drinking his dinner.Meredith,as a randy old coot, has some of the movie's best lines; he more or lesssinglehandedly accounts for the "salty language" that wins the moviea PG-13 rating. But the film basically belongs to Matthau and Lemmon, who haveworked together so often that they fall easily into a rhythm of insult and affection.AnnMargret seems to have fallen easily into the married life, which mostlyconsists of pecking her husband on the cheek before he heads off to fish. Andthe young people go through a perfunctory spat, more or less for plot purposes.Thisis, of course, a big-screen sitcom, and in fact I would love to see thismaterial transplanted to the TV screen, where it belongs.Johnand Max are next-door neighbors in the tradition of the Ricardos and theMertzes, living in each other's pockets and discussing every decision, nomatter how intimate. The addition of the visiting sex bombs resembles the waysitcoms use guest stars. And no misunderstanding is so big it can't be clearedup with a joke, or a kiss."GrumpierOld Men" is not terrifically compelling, although it is probablyimpossible not to enjoy Matthau and Lemmon acting together.Itfeels like what it really should be, a sitcom pilot. By the end of the film,both of the Grumps have gotten married, so I guess there won't be anothersequel, unless something tragic happens to one of the wives, or one of theGrumps starts fooling around. Hey, look - there, across the street! Isn't thatJoan Collins moving in?
