Harriet M. Welsch shakes up her pop bottle to make it fizz,closes her eyes, and makes a wish: “I wanna see the whole world, and I wannawrite down everything.” She becomes a junior Thomas Wolfe, prowling herneighborhood with a treasured notebook and making entries about the man withall the cats, the woman with the weird garden and the goings-on at the Chineserestaurant. Harrietis the heroine of one of the most popular modern books for children, LouiseFitzhugh's Harriet the Spy, which has sold 2.5 million copies and served, Igather, as a great inspiration. On a book review page on the World Wide Web,adult women write in to testify to Harriet's influence: The book made one wantto become a writer, another to become a journalist, and a third (who did notread it as carefully) to become a private eye.Nowhere is the movie, made in cooperation with Nickelodeon and aimed at kids aboutthe same age as Harriet, who is in the sixth grade. It is not a verytechnically accomplished movie--the pacing is slow and there are scenes thatseem amateurish--but since Harriet doesn't intend to inspire anyone to become amovie critic, perhaps it will work a certain charm for its target audience.CertainlyMichelle Trachtenberg (of Nickelodeon's “Adventures of Pete & Pete”), whoplays Harriet, makes a plucky young neighborhood snoop. She stands on piles ofabandoned furniture to peer through dusty windows and climbs up on a roof tospy on the man with the cats, who has named them all after jazz greats.Harrietwrites down everything in her journal, in bold, confident printing that agraphologist would say reveals her need to spell things out very clearly forthose who may not be as swift as she is, a category that includes her parents.They live in a house that looks like it was produced in a collision between theArts and Crafts movement and shop class, and spend most of their time beingvaguely alarmed by their prodigy.Luckily,Harriet has a more understanding adult in her life--her nanny, named Ole Golly(Rosie O'Donnell), who tells her, “There are as many ways to live as there arepeople in this world, and each one deserves a closer look.” Harriet bonds withGolly, but one night Golly and a gentleman admirer take Harriet along on adinner date, they get home late, the parents are hysterical, and Golly leaves: “It'sthe right time.” Harriet now approaches a period of crisis. She creeps on hertummy across the landing to spy on her parents, she makes detailed entries inher notebook, and she gets into a conflict with her classmates, who start theirown counterspy operation. What with one thing and another, Harriet findsherself covered with blue paint and ordered by her parents to stop with thenotebook.Harrietcounterattacks, with a hit list of her enemies and her plans of revenge. We getthe idea that as an adult she would not be someone we'd want as asister-in-law. But she is a likable kid who makes friends with strange locallegends like Agatha K. Plummer (Eartha Kitt). And her fantasy world allows anescape from the ho-hum life at school, where the lessons seem to consistlargely of showing the girls a film named “Girl to Woman,” and the boys a filmnamed “Boy to Man” (“this is an actual photograph of a boy's vocal cords”).Thematerials are here for a better film. The director, Bronwen Hughes, has madeone more suited for the after-school slot on Nickelodeon than for theatricalrelease, where it simply isn't in the same league with “The Secret Garden” or “ALittle Princess” (whose Vanessa Lee Chester plays a best pal again this time).Still,sometimes the materials of a movie like this work on audiences not muchconcerned with style or polish. Harriet is a good role model, a smart, curiousgirl who keeps her eyes open and writes everything down.
