“I love sex. It's just one of the truly great ideas," thehero of "Jeffrey" tells us in the film's opening moments. And for agay man like Jeffrey, there was the brief moment of sexual liberation to enjoy,before the specter of AIDS closed down the party. Now Jeffrey (Steven Weber)finds his sex life so frightening that he decides to swear off - to become celibate,and find other interests. It's not so much that he fears becoming HIV-positivehimself, although he does; it's that he fears falling in love with someone whowill die. Well,everybody dies sooner or later, but Jeffrey is protective and can't see settinghimself up for a loss.That'swhy it's inconvenient one day when he's working out at the gym, and Steve(Michael T. Weiss) makes a pass, and the earth shakes. He's powerfullyattracted to Steve, but fights to suppress his feelings.Jeffrey'sdilemma was the subject of an Off-Broadway play by Paul Rudnick (a.k.a. LibbyGelman-Waxner, the chatty film columnist for Premiere magazine). Now it's beenadapted for the screen, again with revue devices, like speeches directly to theaudience, cameo comedy roles and even a walk-on for Mother Teresa.Seeingthe saintly Mother, another of Jeffrey's friends makes a snap judgment:"She's had work." The line comes from the movie's most sharply drawnand entertaining character, Sterling (Patrick Stewart, of "Star Trek: TheNext Generation"), whose lover, Darius (Bryan Batt) is a dancer who isHIV-positive. Sterling is a meticulously maintained middle-age man with abarbed tongue, quick intelligence and the belief that love is so rare that whenit comes, you have to accept it on its own terms, even if that means (as itdoes in Darius' case) that HIV comes along with it.Jeffreycan't see it that way, and goes through a series of rather unconvincing denialsof love before finally caving in to Steve's charm and technique. And that'sbasically what the movie is about - love, risk and loss - apart from thevignettes, which include Sigourney Weaver as a TV-style self-help guru, andOlympia Dukakis as the mom of a man who intends to become not merely a womanbut a lesbian."Jeffrey"is not without its moments, but the movie never really convinced me it knewwhat it was doing. It's more a series of sketches and momentary inspirationsthan a story that grows interesting - and to guard against our growing tooinvolved, there are intertitles and other self-conscious devices, including asequence where after two men kiss on the screen, the film cuts to two teenagecouples in an imaginary movie audience who find the kiss hard to deal with.This sequence contains the idea for an interesting short film, but as a scenein this one, it's all wrong.Anothermelancholy problem is illustrated by the movie itself. Although"death" has long been a code word in poetry for the moment of climax,the linking of sex and death by AIDS has made it difficult to tell gay malelove stories that don't have at least the possibility of a macabre subtext. Onesolution is to deal with the situation in true drama, as "LongtimeCompanion" and "Philadelphia" did. Another may be to set thestory back to the years before AIDS.What"Jeffrey" does is confront the problem through humor andself-analysis, which is interesting. But when there's a problem love story, andthe problem is of more concern to the characters than the love, you've got . .. well, you've got a problem.
