"Johnny Mnemonic" is one of the great goofy gesturesof recent cinema, a movie that doesn't deserve one nanosecond of seriousanalysis but has a kind of idiotic grandeur that makes you almost forgive it.Based on a story by William Gibson, the father of cyberpunk fiction, it has thenerve to pose as a futuristic fable when in fact all of its parts were boughtoff the shelf at the Used Movie Store. Themovie takes place a few decades in the future, when the world is in the grip ofa high-tech virus caused indirectly by the high-speed cyber lifestyle. It starsKeanu Reeves as a data courier who has a "wet-wired brain" (nowisecracks, please) into which vast amounts of priceless computer data can beuploaded. Then he travels incognito to his destination, where the data isdownloaded. If he doesn't get his brain emptied out fast enough, it melts downand he dies.Asa method of data transfer, this stinks. Even today, it would be faster, easierand safer to encrypt the data and send it by modem, and by Johnny Mnemonic'stime, the world will be wired with fiber optic cables allowing enormous filesto be squirted around the world in seconds.Sowhy would you pump everything into Keanu Reeves' brain and then have a bunch ofbad guys from the Yakuza and other crime organizations chase him from China toNewark? Because it's a movie, stupid. And because, in a concept recycled fromhundreds of other movies, he wants to make "one more final run" inorder to "pay for getting my memory back." (As Johnny explains indialogue that I think is supposed to be poignant, "I had to dump a chunkof long-term memory - my childhood.") The plot of this movie isbreathtakingly derivative. In essence: The hero is entrusted with a valuablecargo, which he must get from A to B without being killed by the bad guys orstepping in anything. There is a pretty girl, evil villains, a weird prophetand of course a violent final shootout in an Abandoned Flame Factory.(Youknow what an Abandoned Flame Factory is; you've seen them a zillion times inthe movies. It's a big clanky warehouse where the hero and the villain stalkeach other for an ultimate confrontation, while pointless and sourceless sheetsof flame burst out as handy background visuals.) This plot could plug equallywell into a Western, a war movie, a samurai film or "Ace Ventura IV."It is not about anything. Or, more to the point, it is the excuse for thespecial effects. And those are good in this movie - really good.Iliked the visuals, for example, when Johnny is getting his multi-gigabytedownload (the one that gives him nosebleed). And I especially liked a virtualreality sequence where Johnny sort of goes inside the Internet and handles thevisualized programming instructions with his hands, which are wearingremote-control gloves.Allgood stuff.Theproblem is, "Johnny Mnemonic" uses the cyber-visuals entirely asatmosphere. Take them away, and the plot could be a 1946 B picture, right downto and including the concocted deadly deadline after a machine in the Newarkairport scans him and announces, "Neural seepage! Fatal within 24 hours!Seek medical attention immediately!") The fiction of Gibson is much prizedon college campuses, where, I am tempted to say, its fans know more aboutcyberspace than about fiction. That's why it's puzzling that this movie is sodumb about computers. Where did it get the notion that the best way to getinformation from Beijing to Newark would be to hand it to a courier and havehim travel the distance? Hey, a lot of people went to a lot of trouble toinvent computers and modems and satellites just to make trips like thatunnecessary. There have also been great advances in the art of cinema sincethis plot was first recycled - but that's another story.
