“Murder in the First" takes place in two worlds. One iscold, gray and artificially lit. The other is as warm as a cedar's dream, allsunlight and furniture polish, brass and tweed. The film is about how a man wholives in one of these worlds might learn to trust a man who lives in the otherone. It is a good idea, but the film depends on us believing in the two men,and that isn't easy. Thestory unfolds during the same season that Joe DiMaggio was setting his recordfor hits in consecutive games; that's a favorite year for filmmakers, becauseit allows them to counterpoint DiMaggio's streak with their own characters'more obscure lives (see, for example, "Farewell, My Lovely"). Theplot involves a man named Henri Young (Kevin Bacon) who has been cruelly treatedby the California prison system, and a lawyer named James Stampill (ChristianSlater) who is appointed to defend him.Young,originally arrested for stealing $5 to feed his starving little sister, waslater kept in solitary confinement for three years, went berserk, killed aguard, and is now being tried for murder. Stampill says the system, not theprisoner, is guilty. As the movie opens, Young has been driven into a tinycorner of his mind by the brutal experience of solitary confinement, and peersout suspiciously at the world. It is Stampill's task to win his trust.Stampillis a man who is always running. The first time we see him, he's chasing a SanFrancisco cable car. He's usually late.Themovie has no particular purpose for establishing this trait; it's justbackground, designed to flesh out a character who needs it. There is noshortage, however, of background for Young, who is played by Bacon as such amass of suffering and victimization that the actor needs every ounce of hisconsiderable skill to keep from eating right through the scenery.Thescenery is, to be sure, awesome. Alcatraz is seen on its bleak, cruel rock, andthe world inside is carefully recreated. The movie's art department reallygrows enthusiastic, however, in the courtroom: Whether this is a set or anactual location I do not know, but if Architectural Digest ever does an issueon the legal system, this is the cover photo. The courtroom is so interesting,in fact, that it almost upstages several important moments; we're looking atthe chairs and wondering if they're real, and how much they cost.Thisis one terrific courtroom.Itis presided over by Judge Clawson (R. Lee Ermey, the former Marine drillinstructor who starred in Kubrick's "Full Metal Jacket"), who runs atight ship, barks commands, has a quirky personality, and is fun to watch,although only a judge in a movie would allow the ending of this trial to unfoldas it does. Other important characters include Gary Oldman as a sadisticAlcatraz warden who administers the inhuman punishment system, and StefanGierasch as the California state prison chief, who doesn't have a clue what'sgoing on. William H. Macy has the thankless role of the prosecuting attorney.Butmost of the film is given over to the relationship between the accused and hislawyer, and Bacon and Slater spend a lot of time in two-shots together, holdingintensity contests. Slater, who in certain shots looks curiously like KevinCostner, is an actor with talent, but he is too young for this role, and notconfident enough to dial down a little. Like DiMaggio the same summer, he wantsa hit every time he goes to the plate. Hollywood sometimes goes on youth kickslike this, casting kids in their mid-20s in roles where a substantial characteractor is called for. Eventually we stop believing in the story, and then westop caring, and then we start admiring that great furniture.
