“Cinema is the history of boys photographing girls.” Or soJean-Luc Godard is claimed to have said. I thought of his words while watching “OneFine Day,” an uninspired formula movie with another fine performance byMichelle Pfeiffer. She does everything in this movie that a much better moviewould have required from her, but the screenplay lets her down. SincePfeiffer is one of the producers, she can blame herself; she *wanted* to makethis predictable fluff about two beautiful people who engage in a verbalsparring match for 90 minutes while we patiently wait for them to acknowledgethat they have fallen hopelessly in love. She completes a three-dimensional,appealing character and puts her in a lockstep plot.Themovie stars Pfeiffer as Melanie, a divorced mom who has some kind of a jobinvolving big architectural projects. George Clooney plays Jack, a divorcedcolumnist for the New York Daily News. Through a series of coincidences, bothsingle parents are suddenly required to take care of their kids for the day,and then circumstances throw them together, again and again.SoOK, what's going to happen? Consider this to be like the crossword puzzle. Getout your pencils.Thekids, Maggie and Sammy, (like/dislike) each other. When their parents are distractedfor a moment, they (run out of sight/stay where they're told to stay). When theparents try to find them, they (do, with great relief/lose them, and the movieturns into “Ransom”). When both parents use identical cellular phones, they(accidentally exchange phones and get each other's calls/keep their own phonesand get all of their own calls). When Maggie grows attached to some kittens,her father (lets her keep them/tells her to forget them). After the Pfeiffercharacter criticizes the Clooney character for being late and irresponsible,she herself is (late and irresponsible/always on time). Toward the end of thefilm, when it appears certain they are in love, a silly misunderstanding(delays this realization/ends in a kiss).Andso on. This is the kind of movie you can sing along with. I amused myself bytrying to figure out Michelle Pfeiffer's job. She works for a big company, Iguess, but her only colleague seems to be her elderly and powerful boss. Whenshe trips and falls and breaks the model of a big architectural project, it'sher job to take it downtown and hire a guy to glue it back together again, andyet she also seems to be the designer, or planner, or salesperson, or broker,or something, of this whole undertaking.Wedon't know for sure because it's all flimflam. Her job scenes should besubtitled “Obligatory Scenes Necessary So Little Maggie Can Be Taken to theOffice.” Jack's newspaper job is easier to understand, especially after heexplains it takes him “about an hour” to write a column, and the mayor isplanning to sue him after yesterday's column. Everybody knows columnists likethat.Meanwhile,the two kids like each other, and the two parents like each other, and thereare scenes at the docks, scenes in the park, scenes in toy stores, scenes inthe streets, scenes in the rain, scenes in taxis, scenes where Ocean Spraycranberry juice gets squirted on Pfeiffer's blouse and similar scenes in whichother garments are stained on a regular basis.Pfeifferlooks, acts and sounds wonderful throughout all of this, and George Clooney isperfectly serviceable as a romantic lead, sort of a Mel Gibson lite. I likedthem. I wanted them to get together. I wanted them to live happily ever after.The sooner the better.
