The force of evil in "Othello" has its origin,"like the origin of everything else in the tragedy, in the character ofits hero," Mark Van Doren wrote. It is Othello who is guilty. Iago is ableto plant his cruel seeds of jealousy only because Othello's character is sothoroughly prepared to receive them. To blame Desdemona's death on Iago is toturn Othello into a pawn, and that violates the purpose of tragedy, which is toshow a hero brought down by his own flaws. Thebest productions of "Othello" show Iago consumed by self-love - by anarcissistic infatuation with his own villainy. Yes, he supplies Othello withthe false evidence to suspect Desdemona, but much of his performance is put onfor his own entertainment. Iago is jealous not of Othello's woman but of hispower, and he destroys Othello's life almost as an exercise in superiority.Thoseare the human emotional engines that drive Shakespeare's play and that havemade it so powerful for so many different audiences for so many years. They areat risk in any modern production, where the fact that Othello is black andDesdemona white is likely to cast a longer shadow than it did in Shakespeare'stime.Especiallyjust at this moment of the film's 1995 release, with the fates of O. J. andNicole Simpson projected like a scrim on top of the screen, it is difficult tofree the play to do its work. To some degree, any modern production must makeIago the villain and Othello the victim, and suffer as a result.Butthis production of "Othello" need not have suffered so much. Adaptedand directed by Oliver Parker and starring Laurence Fishburne, Kenneth Branaghand Irene Jacob (as Othello, Iago and Desdemona), the film gives us a distant,brooding Moor who seems to have had his tragic fall almost before the playbegins, and an Iago who seems more interested in seducing Roderigo, Desdemona'sformer suitor, than in destroying Othello. In enlisting Roderigo (MichaelMaloney) to his conspiracy, Branagh as Iago sets a tone and uses body languagethat reads as homosexual; he seems to be in a play of his own.Thatis not to say Branagh's Iago is badly done; he is the best thing in the movie.But he makes Iago curiously distant from the main line of the action. Iago isin love with conspiracy and his co-conspirators, and destroys Othello as aby-product of his obsession. And Othello, as played by Fishburne, never seemsthe truly happy husband and triumphant general the play initially requires, butseems even in early scenes to be somehow aware of his destiny. Later in thefilm, his character consumed by jealousy, Fishburne makes interesting physicalchoices, as when his head is so filled with images of adultery that it cannotremain still, and twists restlessly.Thatleaves Irene Jacob, as Desdemona, to complete the film's catalog of charactersat right angles to one another. Jacob is a wonderful actress, as anyone whoremembers Krzysztof Kieslowski's "The Double Life of Veronique" or"Red" will recall. But she is appearing here in a play byShakespeare, whose language is so crucial that the scholar Harold Bloom makes ashow of preferring his Shakespeare in text readings rather than stageperformances. Irene Jacob, who is Swiss, is not at home in English, andcertainly not at home in Shakespeare, although she finds a heartbreakingphysical gesture at the moment she is being smothered by Othello: Her handreaches out to caress him.Fishburneis much better, but not truly at ease, although I wonder if he might not havebeen more impressive if he'd been allowed the full reach and texture ofShakespeare's prose. Parker's adaptation slices and dices the original untilthe movie almost could have been based on the "Othello" pages fromBartlett's Familiar Quotations. With the time he saves, Parker gives us adistractingly modern soft-core sex scene and montages that summarize offstageaction that the play itself is hardly concerned with. Even worse are sceneswhere characters talk unheard under the music on the soundtrack; no composer -no, not even Charlie Mole - can improve on Shakespeare.KennethBranagh has had great success with his own films of Shakespeare ("HenryV" and "Much Ado About Nothing"). He is currently at work on a"Hamlet" that will star Robin Williams and Billy Crystal - asRosencranz and Guildenstern, I hope, not Hamlet and Polonius. He has toured inShakespeare and is a master of the cadence of the words, so his ease in thedialogue acts as a contrast to the others.Hisreadings are diabolical and fiery, but do not, as I've suggested, seem focusedon Othello.Theresult is a movie that will not give its viewers much of an idea of theShakespeare play, and may inadvertently give them other ideas, aboutinterracial love, that were not much on Shakespeare's mind. Many people seeingthis film will read it as the story of a jealous black man who wins but cannottrust his white wife, and so kills her. There is a lot more to it than that. Inparticular, there is the way Shakespeare uses language to describe anddramatize universal human weaknesses; either the audience thinks, "There,but for the grace of God, go we," or the production has not worked. Readthe play.
