A movie can get away with anything if it can convince you itbelieves in itself. Theresa Connelly's “Polish Wedding” doesn't succeed. Toomany scenes float above reality, going for cuteness and colorful dialogue andzany quirks, until we begin to question the very possibility that thesewonderful, full-hearted characters could actually exist in a suburb ofDetroit--or anywhere. The movie tells the story of a Polish-American family awash withsecret romance, buried passion and fierce pride. Jadzia Pzoniak (Lena Olin),the mother, is a cleaning woman. Bolek (Gabriel Byrne), the father, worksnights as a baker. The family lives in one of those houses you see only in themovies--where everyone's always looking out the window, and lots of thingshappen in the yard. There are four sons and a daughter, and the boys all seemto sleep in one bedroom, which is not impossible--but a thrifty Polish-Americanfamily who has had two working parents for more than 20 years is more likely, Ithink, to be living in a larger house by now, instead of one that seemsartificially cramped for movie purposes.Jadzia and Bolek are not happily married. Jadzia says shemarried her husband for a good reason, but just at the moment she can'tremember what it was. She dresses in some kind of women's auxiliary outfit oncea week and goes out to her “meeting,” which consists of a liaison with herlover Roman (Rade Serbedzija). He's her boss at work. You might thereforewonder why she's still a cleaning lady, instead of being promoted toreceptionist or something, but there's a scene where he enters the restroomshe's cleaning and she hurls him to the floor and pounces on him for someinappropriate behavior in the workplace; maybe he'd miss that.Jadzia's daughter Hala (Claire Danes), a teenager young enoughto be cast as the virgin in the church procession, is sneaking out nights, too,to see a young cop named Russell (Adam Trese). She gets pregnant and tells herdad, “My clock stopped.” What clock? “Every woman has that kind of clock thatshe tells her time by.” That leads to the double climax, in which the serenityof the procession is much tested, and the entire Pzoniak family marches onRussell's house for a singularly unconvincing confrontation.“Polish Wedding” is the kind of movie that cries out to be setin a country I know little or nothing about. Maybe I would believe thiscolorful behavior in Albania, or in one of those Italian comedies where SophiaLoren knew everybody in town, biblically and otherwise. In a Detroit suburb, Idon't imagine carefree people gambol in the fields and gather around thebreakfast table for family conversations apparently inspired by sitcomdialogue. Oh, I believe all the things happen in Detroit that happen in thismovie; I simply don't believe people rant and rave and posture and emote sowildly while they're happening. A lot of the time I'll bet they'remonosyllabic, and even during their emotional peaks still spend a lot of timewatching TV.Lena Olin is an actress who could have gotten away with thisrole, in another movie in another country. She brings it great life andconviction, but since the movie never connects with the world around it sheseems, alas, more crazy than colorful. Gabriel Byrne's character is written asan enigma and he plays it as if it's certainly an enigma to him. Claire Danesseems too old for some scenes and too young for others; her character is autility infielder, playing all positions and trying to field whatever's hit ather.The movie's mixture of sex, religion and family crazinessreminded me of “Household Saints,” the Nancy Savoca film in which Lili Taylor'sgrandmother believes in saints, her parents believe in the American dream, andLili, by seriously desiring to become a saint, does what would make hergrandmother happy and her parents miserable. All the generational values aresquished together in “Polish Wedding.” We're not looking at behavior, but at alot of dubious anecdotes.
