This is one of several poems written by Lucy, the heroine of“Stealing Beauty,” as she drifts through an endless house party in Tuscany. Iquote Lucy’s poetry because I want to set you a test question. Reading it, howold would you guess Lucy is? Nine? Fourteen? The notion of being “quiet as acup” is not bad. “Rattle me” is better than “drink from me.” Those doubleexclamation points, however... Pencils up. Lucy is 19. If this poetry seemsunsophisticated for a worldly 19-year-old, you should read some of her otherpoems, which are superimposed on the screen in her own handwriting, and (I amafraid) her own spelling.Lucy is a creature without an idea in her head. She has noconversation.No interests. No wit. She exists primarily to stir lust in theloins of the men.After the death of her mother, a poet who visited these Italianhills 20 years ago, Lucy has come back to an artists' home with two things onher mind: She wants to discover the identity of her real father, and she wantsto lose her virginity. Experienced moviegoers can assess the risk that she willsolve these problems simultaneously.“Stealing Beauty” is the new film by Bernardo Bertolucci (“LastTango in Paris,” “The Last Emperor”), who like many a middle-aged man beforehim has been struck dumb by the beauty of a nubile young girl, and has made themistake of trying to approach her on what he thinks is her level. The movieplays like the kind of line a rich older guy would lay on a teenage model,suppressing his own intelligence and irony in order to spread out before her thewonderful world he would like to give her as a gift. Look at these hills! Thesesunsets! Smell the herbed air! See how the light catches the old rose-coveredvilla! The problem here is that many 19-year-old women, especially thebeautiful international model types, would rather stain their teeth withcigarettes and go to discos with cretins on motorcycles than have all Tuscany astheir sandbox. (For an example of a cannier May-December seduction strategy,consider the recent release, “Nelly and Monsieur Arnaud,” in which an older manfascinates a young woman by emphasizing his age and experience and pretendingto be beyond her charms.) Lucy is played by Liv Tyler, a young actress who hasbeen profiled in all the glossies by writers who find it delightful that shethought her father was one rock star when in fact he was another. Thus there isan “autobiographical” component to her search among the artistic lay abouts at theTuscan villa for the man who seduced her mother 20 years ago. Tyler is indeedattractive, and looks enough like Lili Taylor to be her sister. But Lili Taylorusually plays smart women, and if she were in this movie her B.S. Alarm would beringing constantly. The villa is occupied by a sculptor (Donal McCann), whostarts on a tree trunk with a chain saw and is soon sandpapering the curve ofLucy's chin. His earth-mother wife (Sinead Cusack) is tired after 20 years ofcooking and keeping house for a continual house party, and no wonder. The mostinteresting guest is a gay playwright (Jeremy Irons) who is dying of AIDS andattracts Lucy because he is not after her. Other guests include an art dealer(Jean Marais), an advice to the lovelorn expert (Stefania Sandrelli), adesigner (Miranda Fox) and an entertainment lawyer (D.W. Moffett), who sighs, “Ithink it would be great, you know, to just sit around all day and expressyourself.” Neighbors drop in, including assorted young men, one of whom mayhave sent Lucy a letter which she thinks was romantic and poetic--as indeedanyone who writes like Lucy would.The movie is great to look at. Like all those other Brits-in-Italymovies (“A Month by the Lake,” “Enchanted April,” “A Room With a View”), itmakes you want to find this place and go there. In this case, however, you hopethe movie characters have moved out before you get there. There is a simmer ofdiscontent beneath the surface of everyday life in the villa, a sort of sullen,selfish unhappiness that everyone has about his or her lot in life.The purpose of the Lucy character, I guess, is to act like a catalystor a muse, shaking up old patterns and forcing these exiles to decide where theirhomes really are. She is fresh and they are decadent narcissists. Only theJeremy Irons character, absorbed in his dying, and the Donal McCann character,absorbed in his art, have lives of any meaning.The young men who buzz about Lucy are of no substance whatever. Theolder men are of similar substance, but can make better conversation, whichwould be useful if there were any evidence that Lucy was a conversationalist.Actually she serves for Bertolucci more as a plot device than asa person. She represents some kind of ideal of perfect virgin beauty, and thefilm's opening shots, in which a photographer on a plane sees her sleeping andtakes closeups of her lips and crotch, set the tone. The sad thing is that,sleeping, she embodies what she represents to this movie just as well as whenshe's awake.
