Carl Hiaasen's “Striptease” was a novel that thought all of itscharacters were hilarious. Now here is the Demi Moore movie version, in whichall of the characters are hilarious except for Demi Moore's. Her character,named Erin Grant, is a woman who has lost her daughter in a crooked custodybattle, and goes to work in a strip club to earn enough to win her child back. Thewoman is brave, heroic and stacked, but she's not funny. The movie's fatal flawis to treat her like a plucky Sally Field heroine. That throws a wet blanketover the rest of the party. The point of the Hiaasen story was that everyonewas funny: He cast a dubious eye on the strippers, the bar management, thecustomers, the sex-mad congressman, the sneaky sugar baron, Erin'sex-husband--on everyone. They were all part of the same comic world. When youextract one of those characters from the mix and treat her seriously, it throwsoff the timing and it undermines the rationale of the whole undertaking. Myguess is that when Demi Moore and the writers started musing about how ErinGrant would “really feel” in a situation, or how the audience would be able to “identify”with her mother's urge to win her child back, someone should have stepped in togently say: It's a comedy, honey, and when it's not a comedy, it's a satire.Everything in this movie should be for laughs, including the ex-husband, thekids and the brave Erin Grant. As “Striptease” opens, custody of Erin's childis being given over to her worthless husband (Robert Patrick), who may be aconvicted criminal but was, as the Florida judge recalls fondly, “a greattailback.” Erin needs work and starts stripping at the Eager Beaver, a “gentleman'sclub”--so called because most of its customers are never called one anywhereelse. We meet the fellow strippers, including the buxom Urbana Sprawl (PandoraPeaks), who is named after my hometown and so of course deserves a mentionhere. The bouncer is Shad, played by Ving Rhames, who was Marcellus Wallace in “PulpFiction” and this time provides a strong shoulder for a vulnerable girl to cryon. The club customers include the Erin-worshipping Jerry Killian (William Hill),who thinks he may know how to help Erin win her child back, and the perpetuallydrunk and randy U.S. Rep. David Dilbeck (Burt Reynolds), who is capable ofleaping onto the stage in mid-grind to protect one of the dancers from anannoying customer. Among the other threats to the dancers are boa constrictorsthat wrap themselves around their necks, and a management that is alwaysthinking up bright new ideas. One stripper protests against the latest proposal,which is creamed corn wrestling: “No chance I'm gonna roll around in creamedcorn with a bunch of yahoos trying to push Niblets up my hoo-hah.” There is inthat dialogue a suggestion of the direction “Striptease” might have taken.Certainly the director, Andrew Bergman, is capable of making a satirical laughfest; his credits include “Honeymoon in Vegas” and “The Freshman.” But theproblem is with Erin Grant, who interrupts the comic rhythm with her underlyingseriousness. When she's not on the screen, the characters are free to floatinto satire, and Burt Reynolds has some splendid scenes as the tool of thelocal sugar cartel. But when Erin returns, the other actors have to match hermore somber energy level, and there goes the comedy. The sex business iscertainly ripe for satirical treatment. But not here. That leaves the movie'smuch-advertised nudity and eroticism, which for me were disappointing. Thestripteases are choreographed to present the strippers as seasoned pros,indifferent to their nudity and disdainful of their customers.Tobe erotic, a striptease must seem to mean something to the person disrobing:There must be the illusion that nudity is a meaningful decision that thestripper is taking reluctantly. Most striptease gimmicks and props are thereforecounter-productive. A stripper who needs to perform with a snake, or demonstratedexterity in making tassels twirl in opposite directions, is essentially sayingthat she realizes her unclothed body is of no interest unless she also doesparlor tricks. The strippers in “Striptease” take pains to show that stripping inpublic is without psychic risk to them. This is true even of the Erin Grantcharacter, who claims at one point she gets nauseous before she goes on stage, butis a pro the moment the spotlight hits her. The attitude she projects in the TVads is the same one that carries through the movie: I'm doing this so brazenlythat you'll never know how I really feel about it. The greatest stripper of alltime was probably Tempest Storm, who is, I gather, still active in her 60s.Perhaps no one alive has taken it off more often. Yet on the two or threeoccasions when I saw her (including once in a sleazy Times Square theater), shewas able to create the illusion that she was reluctant--all but a blushingnovice--and there was a certain sweet delight in the way she finally disrobed.The strippers in “Striptease” would possibly find her act too revealing; theirimpersonality is a shield protecting them from the suckers. Hiaasen is a veryfunny writer, whose work needs to be respected if it is to work on the screen.Like Elmore Leonard, who Hollywood finally got right in “Get Shorty,” he is nota writer whose books you film for the plot. You film him for the dialogue andthe attitude. Forget that, and why bother?
