“Swept from the Sea” is a plodding retelling of “Amy Foster,”not one of Joseph Conrad's best short stories. It follows the original more orless faithfully, except for the addition of a subtle element ofhomosexuality--which, if it had been less subtle, might have made the moviemore intriguing. The story involves a doomed love affair between a simple countrygirl and a Russian peasant who is swept onto the Cornish shore in 1888, afterhis emigrant ship sinks on its way to America. The peasant, whose hair, beardand rags make him look like a wild man, speaks no English. He is feared by thelocals--except for Amy Foster (Rachel Weisz), a girl born in scandal andworking for the Swaffers, a farm family. Amy is thought to be retarded, but itis more complicated than that; she was a student at the parish school foryears, we learn, without making the slightest effort to read and write. Thenshe read and wrote for a month to prove a point, and then stopped again.Amy and the castaway, whose name is Yanko (Vincent Perez) court,fall in love, are married and have a child. These events are closely monitoredby James Kennedy (Ian McKellen), the local doctor, who shares the generalfeeling that Yanko is simpleminded until the Russian whips him at chess. Withquiet hints and lingering looks, the film makes it clear that the doctorbecomes attracted to the well-built Yanko, and resentful of Amy for possessinghis time and love.Conrad's original story was narrated by Dr. Kennedy, who is notshy in describing Yanko's physical beauty, so the filmmakers are notunjustified in making his feelings more overt. Conrad has Kennedy speaking tothe author of the tale, so that we got a narration within a narration. In thefilm, the doctor tells it instead to the bedridden Miss Swaffer, creating anunnecessary question: Why does he need to tell her things she already knowsfirsthand? Better to simply eliminate the narrator and the flashbacks, and justtell the story from beginning to end.The director is Beeban Kidron, whose films (“Antonia & Jane,”“To Wong Foo, Thanks for Everything! Julie Newmar”) have been miles away fromthis sort of overwrought historical melodrama. She enters into the spirit ofthe enterprise with one of the most remarkable opening shots I have seen, asthe camera sweeps over miles of ocean before rising to the top of a cliff andto the lonely figures of a mother and a child. There also are effective stormscenes, and the landscape is evoked as Conrad described it, as low and flat, adepressing setting for a population devoted enthusiastically to the hatred ofoutsiders.This drabness is relieved by Amy's secret grotto, where shekeeps treasures given to her by the ocean, and where she takes Yanko, also agift of the sea; when they make love in the grotto's waters, however, Icouldn't help wondering about the source of the shimmering underwaterillumination.I suppose the film can be excused for casting the slender andbeautiful Rachel Weisz as Amy, described by Conrad as squat and dull-faced. Thestory is about two outsiders who find each other, and the movie remainsfaithful to that idea while adding another outsider, the doctor, who is neverquite said to be homosexual but goes out of his way to be as near to Yanko ashe can, as often as possible, and whose dislike of Amy extends to rudeness. Atthe end of the film, after the doctor has told Miss Swaffer (Kathy Bates) allthat he knows about the histories of the two unfortunate people, she asks, “Didyour own love blind you to hers?” Kidron and her screenwriter, Tim Willocks,are not reaching in making Kennedy homosexual. But why make his sexuality sounderstated many viewers will miss it? Fear of offending an audience that hasturned up for a conventional period romance? McKellen plays the charactersubtly and with restraint, even deliberate repression; there is the possibilitythe doctor has not acknowledged his sexuality and is responding only tounexamined feelings. But at the end, when the sad story has played out, thereis a moment in which Dr. Kennedy lashes out, and the moment would play betterand provide more of a dramatic shock if the movie had been clearer about thenature of the feelings he is expressing. As it is, “Swept from the Sea” is adisappointment, a film in which good and evil dutifully go through their paces,while the character who could have added complexity and intrigue remains,unfortunately, unrealized.
