Whatever the faults of "Tank Girl," lack of ambitionis not one of them. Hereis a movie that dives into the bag of filmmaking tricks and chooses all ofthem. Trying to re-create the multimedia effect of the comic books it's basedon, the film employs live action, animation, montages of still graphics,animatronic makeup, prosthetics, song-and-dance routines, models, fakebackdrops, holography, title cards, matte drawings and computerized special effects.All I really missed were 3-D and Smell-O-Vision.Themovie is set in the year 2033, after a meteor has struck the Earth, creating aglobal desert. "You gotta squeeze 12 in a bathtub," Tank Girl tellsus in the opening narration, "...so it ain't all bad." The planet ismostly ruled by the evil Water & Power Co., run by a madman named Kesslee(Malcolm McDowell), who controls most of the water supply and whose name ispossibly a misspelled anagram of "leaks." Living outside the W&Psphere is a small group of self-sufficient desert rats, who pump water by handto grow hydroponic crops. Tank Girl (Lori Petty) is one of their number, andwhen Kesslee's troops attack the commune, she wipes out eight of them beforeshe's hauled before the evil monster himself.McDowell,who has specialized lately in weirdo villains, thinks she might be useful inhis war on the Rippers (anagram of Sippers? - oh, never mind).They'rekangaroo-men who were developed in a DNA experiment, as Ultimate Soldiers:They're smart as men, can hop like crazy, and always have a place to keep theirgrenades. (The actors playing them, including Ice-T, are a little easier toidentify than the stars of "Planet of the Apes.") Some Rippersremember life before their DNA got manipulated; one solemnly tells Tank Girl,"I used to be Ted Smith, assistant manager of Chief Auto Parts inCincinnati, Ohio." Tank Girl refuses the chance to work for Kesslee, andafter making a friend of the shy Jet Girl (Naomi Watts), she wages war againstWater & Power, in scenes involving lots of machine guns, tanks, planes,grenades, electrocution, and even a weapon that is plunged into the victim,draining his blood while simultaneously purifying it into water.Underthe direction of Rachel Talalay, the movie plunges headlong into technique.Some of the locations, like the desert commune, are obviously scale models.Others are elaborate sets, including the dark satanic mills where Kesslee setshis slaves to work. Tank Girl careens through this landscape with an evil snickerand incredible good luck, dodging death and causing a lot of pain to thegenital areas of her enemies. She talks back to her captors ("Hey! I havetwo words for you: Brush your teeth!"). She smiles at the camera in aheroically gratuitous Busby Berkeley dance routine.Andof course she prevails.Enormousenergy went into this movie. I could not, however, care about it for much morethan a moment at a time, and after a while its manic energy wore me down.DirectorSidney Lumet has a new book out about how to make movies. In it he observesthat slowly-paced scenes can actually make a movie seem to go faster than arelentless pacing that never stops.Uh-huh.
