The Bradys at 4222 Clinton Way are caught in a time warp. Forthem, it's always the early 1970s, and dad Mike in his polka dot ties and momCarol in her orange Formica kitchen (well-stocked with salt, sugar and whiteflour) like it just that way. They're raising their bunch in happy harmony, andhardly a day goes by without dad sharing one of his optimistic little homiliesabout life: "Alone, we can only move buckets. But together, we can drainrivers!" It is the nature of sitcoms to seem trapped in time. We channelsurf, and Lucy and Desi and Ralph and Alice are still firmly at home in the1950s, in those apartments we have come to know like our own homes. And theBunkers are still at it, in their living room, and so is the Cosby family; thetopical jokes don't seem dated for them, and their fashions never seem out ofstyle, and it is forever 1954, or 1981. Thejoke in "The Brady Bunch Movie" is that time has marched on for therest of the Bradys' neighborhood. While the Bradys blissfully exist insidetheir bubble of the 1970s, the neighbors eye them suspiciously - and sometimeswith outright hostility. For the first time in the movie we finally meet theDitmeyers, their neighbors.Mrs.Ditmeyer has a drinking problem and lusts after the older Brady boys, and Mr.Ditmeyer (Michael McKean) has erected a spite fence to block out their annoyingactivities. When little sister Jan (Jennifer Elise Cox) ventures next door, hesnarls: "Hey, kid - go yodel in your own backyard! Hop back on the SwissMiss package where you belong!") Of course, she's only there to warn himabout the live electric wire that has fallen in his driveway, so is it herfault if he picks it up? Certainly not! And one of the running jokes in themovie is the unconscious passive hostility the Bradys unleash all around them:They're so wholesome, so darn nice, they don't even realize they are drivingpeople mad. (And they're so plastic, do they even have human bodily functions?One neighbor who has actually seen the inside of their house suspiciously tellsa friend, "I didn't even see a toilet.") The plot is made-up of thebits and pieces of what might have been sitcom storylines. The Bradysoverlooked paying their real estate taxes, and now they stand to lose theiridyllic home on Clinton Way. For the neighbors, that's just fine; Mr. Ditmeyerhas plans to raze the neighborhood, and all of the other homeowners areblissful about the prospect of selling out and making big profits on theirhomes. But not Carol and Mike Brady (Shelley Long and Gary Cole). They want tostay right where they are.Innocentof the forces amassed against them, the Bradys wonder how they can raise$20,000 in a week, and the kids pool their lunch money and discuss fund-raisingschemes. Nothing seems to work until they learn of a talent contest with a$20,000 first prize and enter it, as a sort of 1970s Partridge Family singinggroup, dressed like refugees from ancient reruns of "AmericanBandstand." A lot of the humor in the movie comes from the burningjealousy Jan feels for her popular older sister, Marcia (Christine Taylor),with her long blond hair that must be brushed 5,000 times every morning. In herrestless dreams, she whacks off Marcia's flowing locks with kitchen shears, buteven then Marcia is the winner, as her parents compliment her on how great shelooks with her new shorter style. ("It was MY idea!" Jan screams hernightmare. "MINE!") Meanwhile, Marcia's so innocent she invites herbest friend for a sleep-over, and doesn't recognize a lesbian pass ("Sorry. . . I thought that was my leg!").Thereare also lots of jokes about how the parents are slightly adrift from the grimmainstream of modern life, with their sunny values, blind optimism andblinkered view of the harsh 1990s realities all around them. The director,Betty Thomas, is best when she is establishing the bland, seamless, plainvanilla cocoon that protects the Bradys from bad news and evil influences.Unfortunately,the movie itself seems to lean too far toward the Brady vision. Even its"modern" side is too innocent. The film establishes a bland,reassuring, comforting Brady reality - a certain muted tone that works justfine but needs, I think, a bleaker contrast from outside to fully exploit thehumor. "The Brady Bunch Movie" is rated PG-13, which is a compromise:The Bradys themselves live in a PG universe, and the movie would have beenfunnier if when they ventured outside it was obviously Wayne's World.
