“The Spitfire Grill” won the audience award at this year'sSundance Film Festival, which says less for the audience than for the movie.It's an unabashedly manipulative, melodramatic tearjerker with plot twists thatHoratio Alger would have been embarrassed to use, and the fact that it's sowell acted only confuses the issue. Themovie takes place in Gilead, Maine, another one of those small towns likeSalome, Texas, and Whistle Stop, Ala., where everybody knows one another andthey all gather every day to trade the latest news. Towns like this don't muchexist anymore, except in sitcoms, where the characters are constantly “droppingin” on one another to prod the plot and explain the latest developments.Gilead,so far north that the locals call other Americans “flatlanders,” has just had astranger come to town. Her name is Perchance Talbott, Percy for short, and shehas chosen the town after getting out of prison. In a nice little scene, thelocal sheriff (Gailard Sartain) lines up a job for her as a waitress at thelocal restaurant, which is run by an older woman named Hannah (Ellen Burstyn)and already has a veteran waitress named Shelby (Marcia Gay Harden). It alsohas a regular customer named Joe (Kieran Mulroney).Sometimesas a movie critic you have to knock yourself sharply on the ear to dislodge thelast movie you've seen and pay attention to this one. Watching this plotunfold, I was remembering last week's “Heavy,” which also premiered atSundance; its cafe was run by an older woman (Shelley Winters), and had aveteran waitress (Deborah Harry) and a young waitress (Liv Tyler), and had aregular customer whose name was Leo, not Joe, although he was played by JoeGrifasi. Also echoing in the caverns of my memory were several other moviesabout stalwart women running cafes and striding above the local gossip: “TheBallad of the Sad Cafe,” “Fried Green Tomatoes,” “Staying Together” and ofcourse “Bagdad Cafe.” In “The Spitfire Grill,” which weaves several fairly overworn feminist strands into its quilt, everyone of course immediately gossipsabout where Percy came from and why she would want to settle in Gilead. (Evernotice how in the movies people who believe they live in the best place onEarth are always resentful when an outsider wants to move there?) Percy puts anend to the gossip by making a loud announcement at lunchtime: “I've been inprison. So now you know.” Yes, but what was she in prison for? I wondered. Andthen my Automated Mental Plot Analyzer hummed to life, and suggested that in amovie of this sort it is almost inevitable that she committed her crime inself-defense against an abusive man. Is that what did happen? My lips aresealed.Percyis soon asked out by Joe. She grows unhappy at his questions and blurts out theworst part of her past history (such characters of course never blurt out thebest parts). Then Hannah breaks a leg and is laid up in her room, and so Percyand Shelby have to run the restaurant together, and Shelby's husband, Nahum(Will Patton), is unhappy because he thinks this outsider is angling to takeover the restaurant.Meanwhile,Percy learns that Hannah puts canned goods in a sack and leaves them outside bythe old stump, where they are picked up at dawn by a mysterious hooded figure.No points for wondering if the mystery man has any connection to Hannah's sonwho fought in Vietnam. What's clear is that Hannah can no longer run the cafe,and so Percy suggests one of those essay contests like she saw on TV, wherepeople send in $100 and say why they deserve to get the cafe, and the winnertakes over.Thelast half-hour is more than one movie can bear, as sacks of mail arrive,townspeople help judge the entries, and Joe's old father is so moved by one ofthem that he leaves the house for the first time in years, while meanwhilethere is skullduggery involving the money, and a misunderstanding involving thesack of canned goods, and a scientist thinks he can extract a cancer cure fromthe local trees, and if I told you that someone is swept down the river andinto the rapids, you wouldn't believe me, would you? It is impossible tobelieve the events manufactured so prodigiously by “The Spitfire Grill,” andyet there is no hint of a smile: Lee David Zlotoff, who wrote and directed it,means it seriously. What redeems it somewhat is the level of the acting. Youcan see how good actors can make almost anything believable. Alison Elliott isa calm, strong presence at the center, and all of the others are good, too--especiallythe sheriff, Gailard Sartain, and Will Patton as the mean husband (although thescreenplay gives him a speech to deliver that even Tammy Faye Baker would havefound over the top). They make a lot of their moments work very nicely. But themovie as a whole is preposterous.
