There is a word for "The Indian in the Cupboard," andthat word is "creepy." The movie is about a little boy with a magiccabinet that turns plastic toys into real, living humans who are 2 or 3 incheshigh, and puts the boy in the god-like position of being in complete control oftheir worlds and their fates. This is, of course, the fantasy behind all dollsand toy soldiers and suchlike: In a child's imagination, the little figure isalive, as anyone who has heard a little girl talking to Barbie can testify. Butby making the fantasy real, the movie unleashes all sorts of considerations it doesn’t reallydeal with, and the material edges closer to horror than it probably intends. Theboy's name is Omri (Hal Scardino), and he lives in a Manhattan townhouse withhis family. For a birthday present, he's given an old wooden cupboard. Later,his friend Patrick (Rishi Bhat) gives him a small plastic Indian. His motherfinds a key that fits the cupboard door. He puts the Indian in the cupboard,locks the door, and goes to bed - only to hear muffled sounds from inside thecupboard. He opens it again, and is amazed to find that the plastic figure hascome alive, and is a tiny, frightened little human, backed into a corner,shouting defiantly.Thesecret of the cupboard is that, in connection with the lucky key, it turnsplastic into living flesh. The kid is delighted by this discovery, and is soontalking with the Indian, named Little Bear (Litefoot), who has been snatchedfrom the year 1761, and speaks English because he has met English settlers. Atfirst he thinks the kid is the Great Spirit, but eventually, they understandwhat happened, although not with as much shock and incredulity as you mightexpect.Themovie, directed by Frank Oz, was written by Melissa Mathison, who also wrote"E.T." (1982), and here uses some of the same ideas: A little boyhides an amazing living thing in his room, and tries to go about his daily lifewith this secret knowledge. Omri lets his friend in on the secret, and soon isperforming neat tricks like turning a plastic teepee into a real one, so LittleBear will have a home.SoonLittle Bear has a 1:24-scale companion, a cowboy named Boone (David Keith), whoalso starts as a plastic toy and turns into a living miniature, snatchedforward from the 19th century along with his horse. The Indian and Cowboy areat first hostile, but eventually become friends. After all, they have a lot incommon.Thelogic of the situation requires that adults not find out about the littlefigures; Omri and his friend try to deal with their secret on their own. It's alittle monstrous, how they completely possess these little beings, althoughOmri seems to understand his responsibilities, and is always lecturing hisfriend: "They're alive! They're real!" That's when Patrick wants touse them more like toys than people.Theessential sadness of the story - two people jerked out of their lives andminiaturized in a kid's bedroom - underlies almost everything that happens, andis acknowledged in some of the dialogue.Andthere are unhappy developments, as when the little men watch a Western on TV,and Little Bear is so enraged by the slaughter of Apaches that he shoots anarrow at Boone, almost killing him (a plastic figure of an Army medic isbrought to life and comes to the rescue). There is talk of Little Bear's wife,who died of smallpox, but when the kid wants to put a plastic Indian woman inthe cupboard to give Little Bear a wife, the Indian says no: "She has herown life." The movie is slow-going in its center stages, maybe because itdoesn't really confront the implications of the situation. Then there's acrisis when the magic key is lost, and the Indian goes under the floorboards tofind it. Since an older brother's pet rat is also loose under the floorboards,I was anticipating a battle between the tiny man and the deadly rat, as in"The Incredible Shrinking Man" (1957), but the opportunity isavoided."TheIndian in the Cupboard" is not exhilarating or exciting or funny in theways that "E.T." was, and although it tries for the same realism inits depiction of its children, it stumbles over the plight of its little peoplewho become the playthings of the kid-gods. "E.T." was what he was,and dominated his scenes; Little Bear and Boone always seem to be missing something,as if they are happy to be tiny pawns in the plot of a children's story. Themovie looks like a great idea, and I'm sure the TV ads will make it seem likefun, but my hunch is, kids will find this story depressing in ways they can'tfully express.
