I feel funny bringing this up in a review of an animated filmfor kids, but the greatest travel book ever written is The Worst Journey in theWorld, by Apsley Cherry-Garrard. He was a member of Robert Falcon Scott'sdoomed expedition to the South Pole, but the journey he writes about is his owntrek of five weeks in the southern winter of 1911, with two other men, on foot,for 67 miles across broken ice peaks, hauling their own sledges through thepolar night, in the coldest temperatures on earth, to discover the secrets ofpenguins and their eggs. Inthe introduction to his great book, Cherry-Garrard concludes: "Take it allin all, I do not believe that anybody on earth has a worse time than theEmperor penguin." Now you see the connection, since "The Pebble andthe Penguin" is about these very same creatures, which are perhaps themost primitive birds on earth.Sonow here's this jolly cartoon about a shy bachelor penguin who engages in theancient penguin ritual of selecting a pebble from the beach and presenting itto the lady penguin of his dreams. But the hero of the story (named Hubie,voiced by Martin Short) is swept away before he can propose to the beautifulMarina and rescued from a zoo boat by the clever penguin Rocco (voiced by JimBelushi), and returns home, of course, after learning that (all together now)yes, penguins CAN fly! The story is so drippy and inane that I found mythoughts drifting back to those lonely birds Cherry-Garrard discovered at themidpoint of the Worst Journey. The males spend long months in total darknessand gale winds, at temperatures 100 degrees below freezing, sitting on an egg.That is the high point of their year. It is also interesting, which is morethan can be said for the story of this movie.Whatbothered me most about "The Pebble and the Penguin," even more thanits inanity and the sappy Barry Manilow songs ("One perfect pebble, justone humble stone, but oh, what a stone can do . . .") was something thatannoys me in a lot of children's animated features: color-coding.If there is one constant in feature cartoons, it's that the evilcharacters have darker complexions than the heroic ones. At first, I thoughtmaybe I was imagining this, until I realized there were no exceptions to therule, no movies where the good guys were dark and the bad guys were light.In"The Pebble and the Penguin," we have to start, I guess, with adefinition of what constitutes a penguin's complexion. Most of their coat isblack, but not their facial areas, except for around the nose. The rest oftheir facial coloring is white, in the case of Hubie and all of his friends.But when we meet the evil Drake, a villainous penguin, the corresponding areason his face are chocolate brown. That goes for Drake's sidekicks.Whatdo kids learn from this? Nothing overt. Just a quiet, unstated impression:White is good and brave, and brown is scheming and negative. Reinforce thatthrough lots of cartoons (examples: "Aladdin" and "The RescuersDown Under") and no wonder even black children choose white dolls in some psychologicalexperiments.Sociologistswho wonder how children's values are formed might start by studying theanimated films that kids like to look at on video over and over and over again,until they know them by heart - having learned all the lessons, even theunstated ones.
