“To Gillian on Her 37th Birthday” is one of those movies inwhich nosy but well-meaning relatives try to force a reluctant family member toembrace a truth that is obvious to everyone except him. In this case, the truthis that we cannot allow ourselves to be paralyzed forever by grief over thedeath of a loved one. Why do I always root for the recalcitrant family member?The movie takes place two years to the day after Gillian (Michelle Pfeiffer)fell from the mast of a sailboat and died. It is also her birthday. Herhusband, David (Peter Gallagher), since then has lived as a recluse on NantucketIsland with his 16-year-old daughter Rachel (Claire Danes). She suspects thathe fantasizes his wife is still alive, and goes for long walks and talks on thebeach with her. Rachel is correct. Toobserve “Gillian's Day,” as it is known in the family, Gillian's sister Esther(Kathy Baker) and her husband, Paul Bruce Altman), arrive with a female friendnamed Kevin (Wendy Crewson). She is intended as a blind date, although when shefinds out it is Gillian's Day, she wants to return immediately to themainland--and so she should, since she plays such an unnecessary role in thedrama to follow.Themovie, written by David E. Kelley and directed by Michael Pressman, iswell-versed in the cinematic symptoms of excessive grief. David drives toofast, gets in fights with other motorists, plays the radio too loud and goesoff a lot by himself. Esther believes it's time for him to get a grip onhimself. Worse, she plans to sue for custody of Rachel, whom she fears ishaving an inadequate adolescence because of having to spend the offseason onNantucket.Themovie cannot see that Esther is a deranged nuisance who should mind her ownbusiness, that David is entitled to his grief, that Rachel is happy living onthe island, and that if Gillian appears to David, so much the better. (She alsoappears to us, and since we can see and hear her I guess she is “really” there,which gives David an excellent reason for not wanting to leave).Themovie lurches to its sentimental conclusion via several dead-end plot ideasthat are introduced but not developed. During the course of the long day andnight, Rachel goes out on her first date, with a kid she meets on the beach whohas rings piercing his nose, ears and who knows what all, and dyes the sides ofhis head blond, which is proof in any court of law that he is cool or, if notcool, definitely a teenager. David doesn't like the kid but allows the date,during which Rachel gets drunk, comes home, barfs, goes to bed, has anightmare, and then has a heartfelt talk with her aunt and her dad. The subplot(including the dance they go to) is all filler.Sois Kevin, the blind date, who sees she is not needed, says she is not needed,acts as if she is not needed and is not needed. I was also underwhelmed by aside plot having to do with the marital history of Paul and Esther, since this,too, has no bearing on David's problem.Andwhat of David? How does he spend his time as a recluse? Well, he's a literatureprofessor, and claims he's using his free time to write a book. This soundslike a splendid idea, but not to Esther, who believes he should return to themainland and go back to his old job. With people like this, how many bookswould ever get written? We have a national compulsion to insist that peopledeny their grief. A friend loses a loved one, and three weeks later we'reasking, “Are you OK?” And we want them to say, “Why, yes, I'm doing just fine,”so we can nod in approval. If we were really friends, we'd say, “I imagine youstill feel miserable,” so they could say, “Sometimes it's worse than ever.” Asto whether David is able to bid goodbye to his ghost on the beach and return tothe mainland, or whether Esther succeeds in tearing his daughter from his side,I will leave you to guess. Here's fair warning: A movie that hasn't had anoriginal idea in 83 minutes is unlikely to develop one in the last 10.
