Frankie Lymon was 13 when he had his big hit record, and 25 whenhe died. The record fell like a gift from the sky, hit the top of the charts,and can still be heard on the golden oldies stations. The rest of his lifeplayed like the flip side. “Why Do Fools Fall in Love” tells the story of howhe married three women (at least according to them), got into trouble withdrugs and the Army, and self-destructed prematurely, leaving his ex-wivesand/or widows squabbling in court over the estate. There are several angles this material might have beenapproached from, and director Gregory Nava tries several without hitting on onethat works. By the end of the film we're not even left with anyone to root for;we realize with a little astonishment, waiting for the court verdict, that wedon't care who wins.The movie is not really about Frankie Lymon (Larenz Tate), whoremains an enigma. Nor does it have many insights into the three claimants tohis estate: Zola Taylor (Halle Berry), a singer with the Platters, who was hisfirst girl and his second wife; Elizabeth Waters (Vivica A. Fox), a shoplifterwho loved him so much she became a hooker to pay for his drug rehab, and EmiraEagle (Lela Rochon), a church-going waitress who was there when he needed her,after he was drafted into the Army and sent to Georgia for training.What made Frankie run? The movie clearly doesn't know. It setsthe story against a convincing backdrop of the 1950s rock 'n' roll industry,provides some high-energy musical sequences, and finds moments of drama asFrankie is beaten by drug money collectors, steals a mink stole from one womanto give to another and threatens to throw dogs out the window--all whilesomehow remaining a lovable madcap. Well, most of the time.The usual generic conventions seem missing. There is no realsense of loss in Frankie's death, since his early promise, if genuine, was soquickly dissipated. There is no sense that be betrayed the three women: Heloved them all, after his fashion, and was so needy, he simply reached out tothe closest one. An awkward courtroom scene at the end belatedly tries to pinsome of the blame on a record producer (Paul Mazursky) who stole co-writingcredit and perhaps a lot of Frankie's profits, but the producer, if guilty, wasstill not responsible for most of the events in the movie. Frankie was. Hissong should have been, “When I'm Not With the One I Love, I Love the One I'mWith.” The movie's director is Gregory Nava, whose artistry in films like “ElNorte,” “My Family” and “Selena” seems missing this time: His films usuallyproceed from passion and commitment, and here the inspiration seems to bemissing. It's as if someone read about Lymon's three wives in court and decidedit would be a great story, without ever deciding what the story was.The four principal actors all provide the spectacle of talentwithout purpose: They do what they can with their characters and their scenes,but the screenplay doesn't provide them with an arc or a purpose. When theircharacters reappear, we haven't been waiting for them. When they're offscreen,we don't miss them. That's true even of Frankie, who is missing a fair amountof the time.What approach might have worked? Hard to say. Maybe the wholething should have been seen exclusively through Frankie's eyes, as a kid whohas his 15 minutes of fame at an early age and then dines out for the rest ofhis life on other people's memories. That would have meant jettisoning thewhole court case and its flashbacks, but the court stuff doesn't work anyway.Maybe straight chronology would have been a better idea, allowing Frankie to bethe focus, and allowing us to follow his moves more clearly from one woman tothe next and back again. As it stands, “Why Do Fools Fall in Love” neverconvinces us its story is worth telling, and never finds a way to tell it, evenif it is.
