In the opening scenes of "Feast of July," a youngwoman makes her way across one of those landscapes that seem to exist for thepurpose of illustrating Victorian novels. The sky is dark and lowering, thewind bites sharply across the heath, and she staggers into shelter just in timeto give birth to a stillborn child, and bury it. Then she somehow makes her wayinto a grim little village, where a local man takes pity on her and invites herhome. Theman is Ben Wainwright (Tom Bell), and his family consists of his wife (GemmaJones) and his three sons: Jedd (James Purefoy), an Army man; Matty (KennethAnderson), a shoemaker, and Con (Ben Chaplin), the youngest, who seems a littleslow and socially maladroit. Mrs. Wainwright cares for the homeless woman, namedBella (Embeth Davidtz), and learns or guesses much of her story.Itis clear to us that the introduction of this attractive young woman into thehousehold is going to cause problems, but it is not clear to Ben, who tells hershe can stay if she will help with the family's work. Soon all three sons aresmitten with her, but she takes pity on young Con, who seems helpless andidentifies more with his pet pigeons than with other people.Meanwhile,Bella's past is revealed. She was seduced and abandoned by a slick-talking cadnamed Arch Wilson (Greg Wise), who told her he lived in this village. That wasa lie, along with almost everything else he told her, and when one day she seeshim in a street and follows him, she discovers that he has also deceived anotheryoung woman. Meanwhile, Con proposes marriage, and to the astonishment of thefamilyBella accepts.Thatleads to a final showdown between Con and Arch Wilson, and the kind of bleakVictorian conclusion we would expect from Wilkie Collins, or George Gissing. Itis a little surprising to find it comes from a novel by H. E. Bates(1906-1974), a modern figure.Myproblem with the film was that none of the characters is really interesting.Even Bella, well played by Davidtz (from "Schindler's List"), seemslike a pawn in a melodrama rather than a woman with ideas of her own. Herchoice of Con for a husband is inexplicable: He seems slow and uninteresting.Ben, the father, is curiously detached from his family, and not perceptive.Mrs.Wainwright,the mother, is perceptive, but nothing is made of that.Andthe conclusion of the film is bleak without being meaningful.
