Curious, how in such a disappointing comedy, Bill Murray managesto dash off a hilarious warm-up. The opening scenes of “Larger than Life,”showing him as a third-rate motivational speaker, are right on target, with onezinger after another aimed at after-dinner speakers who promise to remake yourlife with touchy-feely slogans. Murrayplays Jack Corcoran, whose trademark slogan is “Get Over It!” He shows abanquet crowd how to unleash its hidden abilities by calling for volunteers tomake a human pyramid. His clients include the American Motion Upholstery Assn.(reclining chairs), but his agents promise him some bigger fees, real soon.Meanwhile, he's preparing to get married, urged on by his mom (Anita Gillette),who has always told him his father drowned while saving helpless children.Nottrue. A telegram arrives informing him of his father's death. “You mean I had afather all these years?” he wails, and his mother explains she left her husbandbecause he was “irresponsible.” Maybe he was. The old man was a circus clown.Jack's inheritance includes a pile of bills and a trained elephant named Vera.Mostof “Larger than Life” involves Jack's attempts to move Vera entirely across theUnited States, to California, where the elephant will end up either as thevictim of a sadistic animal trainer (Linda Fiorentino) or as part of a breedingherd being shipped to Sri Lanka by an environmental activist (JaneaneGarofolo).Theformula for road movies, even those involving elephants, includes colorfulcharacters encountered along the way, and two of the bright spots in a dimscreenplay are provided by an old carny named Vernon (Pat Hingle) and histattooed wife Luluna (Lois Smith). They knew and loved Jack's father, and teachJack some commands which (sometimes) make Vera perform an amazing repertory oftricks. They also advise him to avoid the straight life and become a carny, nota rube.Jack'sadventures with transporting Vera include a train journey, followed by attemptto maneuver a semitrailer truck. And we meet Tip Tucker (Matthew McConaughey),a manic semi owner-operator with weird theories about everything in Americansociety, especially school lunch programs. He pursues Jack and Vera cross-countryafter they misuse his truck. At the end of the journey, Jack has to decidebetween the circus and the zoo for Vera--and, in a way, for himself.Thematerials are here to make a good comedy, I guess. The screenplay is by RoyBlount Jr., a funny writer. But the energy isn't there. Murray often chooses toplay a laid-back, detached character, but this time he's so detached he'salmost absent. He chooses to work in a low key, and the other actors, inmatching his energy level, make a movie that drones instead of hums. Comedy isoften about people who are passionately frustrated in goals they're convincedare crucial. Here Jack hardly seems to care, as he and Vera mosey alongcross-country, bemused rather than bedazzled by their adventures.Thesad thing is, there are the fixings for another comedy, probably a much betterone, right there in the opening scenes. Motivational speakers are ripe forsatire. The bookshelves groan with self-improvement volumes, all promising toexplain the problems of your universe, and their solution, in a few well-chosenrules. An honest bookstore would post the following sign above its “self-help”section: “For true self-help, please visit our philosophy, literature, historyand science sections, find yourself a good book, read it, and think about it.”Murray's portrait of an inspirational speaker is right on target, and filledout with lots of subtle touches of movement and dialog, and there is humor,too, in the way his audiences will go along with his insane schemes (like thehuman pyramid), as if being able to balance three people on your back wouldsolve your problems at work. This whole section of the movie is inspired;Murray should star in the movie of “The Dilbert Principle.” As for the elephantportions of the movie: They say an elephant never forgets, which means that Ihave an enormous advantage over Tai, who plays Vera, because I plan to forgetthis movie as soon as convenient.
