“Lost in Space” is a dim-witted shoot-'em-up based on the old (Ihesitate to say “classic”) TV series. It's got cheesy special effects, a muddyvisual look, and characters who say obvious things in obvious ways. If itoutgrosses the brilliant “Dark City,” the previous sci-fi film from the samestudio, then audiences must have lost their will to be entertained. The TV series was loosely modeled on the novel The Swiss FamilyRobinson, about a family shipwrecked far from home and using wit and ingenuityto live off the land. I loved that book, and especially its detaileddescription of how the family made tools, machines, and a home for themselves,and trained the local animals.The movie doesn't bother with such details. After a space battlethat is the predictable curtain-raiser, and a quick explanation of why and howthe Robinson family is setting off for a planet called Alpha Prime, the filmtakes place mostly onboard their saucer-shaped ship, and involves many morespace battles, showdowns, struggles, attacks, hyperspace journeys, andexploding planets. In between, the characters plow through creaky dialogue andexhausted relationship problems.Imagine the film that could be made about a family marooned on adistant planet, using what they could salvage from their ship or forage fromthe environment. That screenplay would take originality, intelligence andthought.“Lost in Space” is one of those typing-speed jobs where thescreenwriter is like a stenographer, rewriting what he's seen at the movies.The story: Earth will not survive another two decades. AlphaPrime is the only other habitable planet mankind has discovered. Prof. JohnRobinson (William Hurt) and his family have been chosen to go there andconstruct a hypergate, to match the gate at the earth end. Their journey willinvolve years of suspended animation, but once the other gate is functioning,humans can zip instantaneously to Alpha Prime.There needs to be a hypergate at both ends, of course, becauseotherwise there's no telling where a hyperdrive will land you--as the Robinsonssoon find out. Also onboard are the professor's wife Maureen (Mimi Rogers),their scientist daughter Judy Robinson (Heather Graham), their younger daughterPenny (Lacey Chabert), and their son Will (Jack Johnson), who is the brains ofthe outfit. The ship is piloted by ace space cadet Don West (Matt LeBlanc), andincludes an intelligent robot who will help with the tasks at the other hand.Oh, and lurking below deck is the evil Dr. Zachary Smith (GaryOldman), who wants to sabotage the mission, but is trapped onboard when theship lifts off. So he awakens the Robinsons, after which the ship is thrown offcourse and seems doomed to fall into the sun.Don West has a brainstorm: They'll use the hyperdrive to zapright through the sun! This strategy of course lands them in a galaxy far, faraway, with a sky filled with unfamiliar stars. And then the movie ticks off aseries of crises, of which I can enumerate a rebellious robot, an explodingplanet, mechanical space spiders, a distracting romance, and family issues oftrust and authority.The movie might at least have been more fun to look at if it hadbeen filmed in brighter colors. Director Stephen Hopkins and hiscinematographer, Peter Levy, for some reason choose a murky, muted palette.Everything looks like a drab brown suit, or a cheap rotogravure. You want touse some Windex on the screen. And Bruce Broughton's musical score saws awaytirelessly with counterfeit excitement. When nothing of interest is happeningon the screen, it just makes it worse when the music pretends it cares.Of the performances, what can be said except that William Hurt,Gary Oldman and Mimi Rogers deserve medals for remaining standing? The kids arestandard-issue juveniles with straight teeth and good posture. And there is amonkeylike little alien pet who looks as if he comes from a world where allliving beings are clones of Felix the Cat. This is the kind of movie that, ifit fell into a black hole, you wouldn't be able to tell the difference.
