Watching Walter Matthau and Jack Lemmon make the talk showcircuit, trading one-liners and barbs like a vaudeville team, I imagined adocumentary simply showing them promoting this film. They're funny, familiar,edgy and smart. “The Odd Couple II” is none of those things, and a much longerlist could be made of other things it is not. Lemmon and Matthau are perfectly suited for working together. Inlife as in fiction, they are a little like the original odd couple, Felix andOscar: Lemmon concise and tidy, Matthau rambling, shambling and gambling. Whenthey're given a decent screenplay, as in the original “Odd Couple” (1968) orlast year's engaging “Out to Sea,” they're fun to watch; their timing isimpeccable, and you can sense their joy of work.“Odd Couple II” is not, alas, such a screenplay. It has beenwritten by the master, Neil Simon, who in this case is an emperor without anyclothes. Did no one have the nerve to suggest a rewrite? To tell him that hisstory was slight, contrived and flat? Perhaps it seemed to the producers thatthe combination of Simon, Lemmon, Matthau and the words “odd couple” were asufficient guarantee of success. The difference between a creative executiveand a contract-signer lies precisely in the ability to see, in a case likethis, that they were not. (Of course, Simon himself is one of the producers onthis film, so in a way he was working without a net.) The story opens 17 yearsafter Oscar and Felix last saw each other. (It's 30 years since the movie, butthat would make their children middle-aged, so never mind.) Oscar now lives inFlorida, where he plays cards with old cronies and practices trying to hit hisgarbage can with a Hefty bag from an upper floor. Felix stayed in New YorkCity, where he does part-time charity work at a hospital. They get calls:Oscar's son is engaged to marry Felix's daughter.This inevitably requires them to fly to Los Angeles, where theyplan to rent a car and drive to the town where the wedding is being held (it's “Sansomething,” but they can't remember what). Felix injures his foot whilecrashing into Oscar at the airport, they rent a car, the car rolls over a cliffand explodes, etc., and they find themselves in a road movie, complete withseamy motels and colorful characters along the way.Simon's Borscht Belt humor still prevails in the dialogue. (“Mysister lost three pairs of dentures in the earthquake.” “What did she do toeat?” “She sent out.”) There are jokes about age, sex and death, and a nicesight gag after they get a lift in a Rolls-Royce driven so slowly that they arepassed up first by runners, and then by walkers.But the movie has no purpose for being. That's revealed by theroad movie premise: The genre is ideal for throwing characters and dialoguesituations at them without the bother of contriving any kind of a dramatic orcomedic reason for them to be together. More honest, and maybe even funnier,would have been the story of the two old adversaries forced to be roommates ina retirement village. The movie slogs on and on, Matthau and Lemmon gamelydelivering lines that may contain mechanical wit, but no impulse or dramaticpurpose.
