In his choice of characters, Robin Williams seems morecomfortable playing soloists--people set apart by special skills or problems.Remember him in “Jumanji,” trapped in time. Or in “Popeye,” where “I yam whatyam.” Or in “Mrs. Doubtfire,” crossing the gender line. Or consider hisunclassifiable characters in “The Fisher King” and “Toys.” The closest he comesto a three-dimensional, grownup person is in “The World According to Garp” and “GoodMorning, Vietnam.” Williams seems most at home in bodies that don't quite fit.Maybe that's why he had so much fun doing the voice of the genie in “Aladdin.”He must have been the first choice for Francis Ford Coppola's “Jack,” where heplays a boy who is aging at four times the normal rate. He is born, fullydeveloped, after a two-month pregnancy, and at the age of 10 he looks exactlylike a 40-year-old man. Thenotion of a boy trapped in a man's body has been done before, by Tom Hanks in “Big,”for example. “Jack” brings it poignancy, because the situation isn't caused bymagic, but by medical reasons; it's obvious Jack may not turn 20. (Hiscondition is not inspired by a real disease, but was created by thefilmmakers.) Williams works hard at seeming to be a kid inside an adult body,and some of his inspirations work well. But he has been ill-served by ascreenplay that isn't curious about what his life would really be like.Coppolabrought great pathos to a similar situation in his “Peggy Sue Got Married”(1986), where a 43-year-old woman (Kathleen Turner) found herself inside herown teenage body. He found scenes that dealt truly with the crushing fact thatwe float on a current of time. In “Jack,” he and his writers, James DeMonacoand Gary Nadeau, go for more obvious payoffs.Thesetup: As a device to make the story simpler and more dramatic, “Jack” isessentially kept out of society until he's 10. A tutor (Bill Cosby) comes tohis home every day, and Jack has no ordinary contact with other kids. The movieexplains this through the concerns of his uptight mom (Diane Lane), but finallythe tutor and the dad (Brian Kerwin) prevail, and he goes to school.Ofcourse the other kids don't accept him. Well, why should they? He's got areceding hairline. (His dad teaches him to shave during the film, which seemsodd, since by my calculations he should have been doing that since he was about4.) When he sits down on his first day in fifth grade, the desk isn't bigenough, it collapses beneath him, and my heart sank: Why would anyone the sizeof Robin Williams try to sit in a fifth-grade chair except to produce aslapstick gag? Eventually the kids accept him (he's a good basketball center),and then they find he has other uses--he can buy Penthouse, for example. Butinstead of using Penthouse as the springboard for observations about how boysthat age are ambivalent to sex, the movie goes for a payoff in which a treehouse collapses. (The next time I see a tree house collapse or a character fallthrough several floors of an old building, I'm going to fine the prop union.)There is one scene that works, is true, and does illuminate Jack's humandilemma. That's the scene where he gets a crush on his teacher (Jennifer Lopez)and plies her with a bag of red Gummi Bears before asking her to the schooldance. (She's the only female in view who is tall enough to dance with him.)The way the teacher tactfully and gently handles this situation is anillustration of a path the whole movie could have taken, had it been moreambitious.But“Jack” doesn't want to be a great movie. It only wants to pluck the usualheartstrings and provide the anticipated payoff. Far from being able toempathize with the thought processes of a 10-year-old, the filmmakers place himin situations they can imagine but a kid probably couldn't. I intenselydisliked a subplot involving a schoolmate's trampy mother (Fran Drescher) thatleads to a scene in a bar that doesn't work and doesn't belong, but doesillustrate the ancient principle that every time there is a bar in a movie,there is a fight.Whowas this movie made for? Kids, maybe, who will like the scene where Jack passeshimself off as the school principal (although the scene could have been writtenwith smarter dialogue). But if this is a kids' movie, go for kids' referencepoints. Or if it's for adults, then it shouldn't have been constructed as asitcom. My best guess is that the premise blinded everyone. Robin Williams is a40-year-old in a 10-year-old's body? Great! When do we start shooting? Ifanyone dared to bring up the possibility of a better screenplay, he was probablyshouted down: In the delirium of high concept, it doesn't pay to rain on theparade--no, not even if flowers might afterward grow.
