Michael Crichton is the science-fiction author that people readif they think they're too good for “regular” science fiction. Too bad. Whatthey get in the film version of “Sphere,” directed by Barry Levinson, is a watered-downtake on the sci-fi classic Solaris, by Stanislaw Lem, which was made into animmeasurably better film by Andrei Tarkovsky. The underlying idea is the same: Humans come in contact with anextraterrestrial presence that makes their fears seem real. The earlier noveland film challenged our ideas about human consciousness. “Sphere” functionsmore like a whodunit in which the plot's hot potato is tossed from character tocharacter.As the movie opens, an expert team is brought to the middle ofthe Pacific, where an amazing thing has been found on the ocean floor: a giantspacecraft, apparently buried for nearly 300 years, that still emits a distanthum--suggesting it is intact and may harbor life. The members of the team: apsychologist (Dustin Hoffman), a mathematician (Samuel L. Jackson), abiochemist (Sharon Stone) and an astrophysicist (Liev Schreiber). In command ofa Navy “habitat” on the ocean floor, next to the ship, is Peter Coyote. Thehabitat's small crew includes radio operator Queen Latifah, from “Set It Off,”who is on hand to illustrate Hollywood's immutable law that the first characterto die is always the African American.The descent to the ocean floor, accompanied by much talk aboutdepressurization, will be a disappointment to anyone who remembers the suspensein similar scenes in James Cameron's “Abyss.” And the introduction of thespacecraft is also a disappointment: Instead of the awe-inspiring firstglimpses we remember from “Close Encounters” or even “Independence Day,” it's athrowaway. No wonder. The ocean-floor special effects are less thansensational, and the exteriors of the descent craft and the spacecraft are alltoo obviously models.No matter, if the story holds our attention. At first it does.As long as we're in suspense, we're involved, because we anticipate greatthings. But “Sphere” is one of those movies where the end titles should bePeggy Lee singing “Is That All There Is?” The more the plot reveals, the morewe realize how little there is to reveal, until finally the movie disintegratesinto flaccid scenes where the surviving characters sit around talking abouttheir puzzlements.I have been careful to protect most of the film's secrets. I canbe excused, I suppose, for revealing that what they find inside the spacecraftis, yes, a sphere. Where does this sphere come from? Who or what made it? Howdoes it function? I am content to let it remain a mystery, so long as itentertains me, but after a promising start (it generates a “2001-style” hurtle throughspace and time) it just sits there, glowing and glowering, while the humansdeal with the dangers of undersea life.Hoffman, Jackson, Stone: These are good actors. How good isillustrated by how much they do with the flat, unyielding material. The last 20minutes of the film are a slog through circular explanations and speculationsthat would have capsized lesser actors. They give it a good try, with dialoguethat sounds either like characters analyzing the situation, or actors trying tofigure out the plot.“Sphere” feels rushed. The screenplay uses lots of talk toconceal the fact that the story has never been grappled with. The effects andthe sets are pitched at the level of made-for-TV fare. The only excellence isin the acting, and even then the screenplay puts the characters through so manyU-turns that dramatic momentum is impossible.There are ideas sloshing around somewhere in the rising watersaboard the undersea habitat. The best one is an old science-fiction standby:Are humans mature enough to handle the secrets of the universe? Or are we butan infant species, whose fears and phobias prevent us from embracing the bigpicture? The last scenes are supposed to be a solemn confrontation of thesequestions, but they're punctuated by a special-effects shot so puny andunderwhelming that the spell is broken.That's all, folks. Put your hands together for Miss Peggy Lee.
