This will not do. It is like taking up the story of Salome aftershe has put the veils back on. Another problem is that there is not much actionin Nathaniel Hawthorne's novel, except inside the minds and souls of thecharacters. A third is that the Rev. Dimmesdale, who impregnates poor Hester,is the leader of the local hypocrites who persecute her. Channel surfing theother morning, I came across Demi Moore just as she was describing The ScarletLetter as "a very dense, un-cinematic book." And so it is; many ofthe best books are. That's what rewrites are for. The film version imagines allof the events leading up to the adultery, photographed in the style of those"Playboy's Fantasies" videos. It adds action: Indians, deadly fights,burning buildings, even the old trick where the condemned on the scaffold are savedby a violent interruption. And it converts the Rev. Dimmesdale from a scoundrelinto a romantic and a weakling, perhaps because the times are not right for amovie about a fundamentalist hypocrite. It also gives us a red bird, whichseems to represent the devil, and a shapely slave girl, who seems to representthe filmmakers' desire to introduce voyeurism into the big sex scenes. Thestory, you may recall, involves a Puritan woman named Hester Prynne (DemiMoore) who is found to be pregnant even though her husband has not arrived inthe Massachusetts Bay colony and is feared dead.Afterrefusing to name the father of her child, Hester is condemned to wear a scarletletter on her bodice. Her daughter Pearl is born, and grows up as a willfullittle vixen. It is revealed that the father of the child is Arthur Dimmesdale(Gary Oldman), leader of the local bluenoses denouncing Hester. And then herlong-lost husband, Roger Prynne (Robert Duvall), turns up, assumes anotheridentity and tries to determine who was the thief of his wife's affections. Thenovel ends with poor Dimmesdale confessing his sin, crying out "His willbe done! Farewell!" and dying.Itis obviously not acceptable for Dimmesdale to believe he has sinned, and so themovie cleverly transforms his big speech into a stirring cry for sexual freedomand religious tolerance. Instead of dying of a guilty seizure, he snatches thenoose from Hester's neck and pulls it around his own, only to be saved when theIndians attack, driving a burning cart through the village. The roles of thepuritanical local ministers are farmed out to supporting actors, and Dimmesdaleis left to hang around sheepishly, keeping his guilty secret but regardingHester with big, wet eyes that beg for forgiveness and understanding.DirectorRoland Joffe says "the book is set in a time when the seeds were sown forthe bigotry, sexism and lack of tolerance we still battle today . . . yet it isoften looked at merely as a tale of 19th century moralizing, a treatise againstadultery." Actually, it is more often looked upon as a tale of 17thcentury moralizing and a treatise against hypocrisy. But never mind. Joffeadds, "Of course, it is also a marvelous romance." Not so marvelous,really. After insisting on a life alone in a cottage outside town, which setslocal tongues a-wagging, Hester is walking in the forest one day when she comesupon a man skinny-dipping in a pond. It is the Reverend, although she doesn'tknow that. She, and we, see him in the altogether, and then she hears him preachingin church, where he sounds a good deal more like Susan Powter than like aPuritan.Hesterentertains lustful thoughts about his body, and they entertain her. (GaryOldman, marvelous actor that he is, may not be everybody's ideal of the perfectmale physique - remember him as Sid Vicious? - but on the whole I think we canbe relieved Brad Pitt was not cast.) Hester's comely slave girl, Mituba (LisaJolliff-Andoh), prepares her bath, and then Hester slowly luxuriates in it bycandlelight, while dreaming of Arthur. It is hard to see for sure, but I thinkshe may be indulging in the practice that the nuns called "interferingwith herself." Meanwhile, through a convenient peephole, Mituba watcheslustfully, for no other purpose than to provide the additional thrill of oneattractive woman observing another one naked. Will the sin that dare not speakits name make an appearance in Massachusetts Bay? Alas, no; the prospect ofinterracial lesbian love, appealing as it is to today's filmmakers, would not quitefit into this story, even as revised and updated.SoonDimmesdale visits Hester, they become powerfully attracted to each other, andthey commit adultery on a bed of dried beans in the shed. Mituba again watchesthem, disrobing and crawling into her mistress' bath. Mituba holds a candlewith its flame just above the waterline, and at the moment of their climax, shedraws it under the water, extinguishing it with a hiss. This is much betterthan curtains blowing in the wind; it's the equal of the moment in "Ryan'sDaughter" when, as the two lovers coupled, his stallion neighed and hermare whinnied.Therest of the film is more or less as I have described it, although longer, muchlonger. Lurid melodrama develops after Hester's husband arrives, played by RobertDuvall as if he'd never had sex in his life and didn't want anybody else topartake, either. The movie's morality boils down to: Why should this sourpussstand between these two nice young people? The movie has removed thecharacter's sense of guilt, and therefore the story's drama. ("Do youbelieve . . . what we did was wrong?" asks Hester.) Hollywood has takenthat troublesome old novel and made it cinematic, although I'm afraid it'sstill pretty dense.
