“Woo” is about a collision between black lifestyles, when asexpot looking for “someone impulsive and exciting” ends up with a middle-classprofessional, and puts him through a severe psychosexual test-drive. When the smoke clears, she's revealed as not quite as street asshe pretends, and he turns out to have a few personality secrets concealedbehind that white collar. Along the way, the movie touches on subjects usuallyside-stepped in African-American films, including the discomfort of blackprofessionals around “country” behavior.Jada Pinkett Smith stars, as Woo, a girl who likes to party andis looking for a man. Her transvestite psychic friend predicts that a dynamicVirgo is in her future, but she doubts it. That night, she drops in on hercousin Claudette (Paula Jai Parker) and her boyfriend Lenny (Dave Chappelle),but they want to be alone together, so Lenny talks his friend Tim (TommyDavidson of “In Living Color”) into taking her out. Tim is a law clerk,studying for the bar; Woo suspects a bore, but agrees to the date when shefinds out he's a Virgo.That's the setup for a movie constructed so loosely that I hadthe feeling some of the characters were introduced after we'd already met them.The film is a series of episodes in which Woo and Tim demonstrate to eachother's satisfaction (and certainly to ours) that they have no business beingout on a date with each other--although of course, after they survive assortedbizarre adventures, a certain camaraderie grows up between them. As hostages ofeach other, they develop reciprocal Stockholm syndrome.The running joke is that Tim doesn't know much about women or,for that matter, black culture. Fixed up on the blind date with Woo, he goesacross the hall to get tips from his neighbor Darryl (LL Cool J), who supplieshim with a kit containing various stimulants and preventatives, and a cassetteof absolutely guaranteed romantic music (“by the time you get to side B, youshould be naked”).Woo is not in the mood to be wooed, however, and the eveningbreaks down into episodes such as the one in an Italian restaurant, wherepolite Tim doesn't get very far with the waiter, but Woo (who turns out tospeak Italian) does. Then she sees an old friend through the window, and theirreunion essentially demolishes the restaurant.Movies like this don't really establish their characters anddraw much of the humor out of their personalities; they go for quick payoffs,easy slapstick and in-jokes based on insults and code words. It's harmless andsometimes entertaining, but compared to Tommy Davidson's previous film, “BootyCall” or for that matter Jada Pinkett's work in “Set it Off” and “The NuttyProfessor,” it's lightweight and disposable.
