They Meet Cute on a train in Austria. They start talking. Thereis a meeting of the minds (our most erotic organs) and they like each other.They're in their early 20s. He's an American with a Eurail pass, on his way toVienna to catch a cheap flight home. She's French, a student at the Sorbonne,on her way back to Paris. They go to the buffet car, drink some coffee, keeptalking, and he has this crazy idea: Why doesn't she get off the train with himin Vienna, and they can be together until he catches his plane? This sort ofscenario has happened, I imagine, millions of times. It has rarely happened ina nicer, sweeter, more gentle way than in Richard Linklater's "BeforeSunrise," which I could call a "Love Affair" for Generation X, exceptthat Jesse and Celine stand outside their generation, and especially outsideits boring insistence on being bored. Thereis no hidden agenda in this movie. There will be no betrayals, melodrama, phonyviolence, or fancy choreography in sex scenes. It's mostly conversation, asthey wander the city of Vienna from mid-afternoon until the following dawn.Nobody hassles them."BeforeSunrise" is so much like real life - like a documentary with an invisiblecamera - that I found myself remembering real conversations I had experiencedwith more or less the same words.Jesseand Celine are played by Ethan Hawke and Julie Delpy.Youmay remember him from "Dead Poets Society," "White Fang" orespecially "Reality Bites," in which he played a character who is 180degrees different from this one. She starred in Krzysztof Kieslowski's"White," as the wife who eventually regrets dumping her husband. Hereshe is ravishingly beautiful and, more important, warm and matter-of-fact,speaking English so well the screenplay has to explain it (she spent some timein the States).Whatdo they talk about? Nothing spectacular. Parents, death, former boyfriends andgirlfriends, music, and the problem with reincarnation when there are morepeople alive now than in all previous times put together (if there is a finitenumber of souls, are we living in a period of a 5-to-1 split?). Linklater'sdialogue is weirdly amusing, as when Jesse suggests they should think of theirtime together as a sort of "time travel," and envisions a future inwhich she is with her boring husband and wonders, "what would some ofthose guys be like that I knew when I was young," and wishes she couldtravel back in time to see - and so here she is, back in time, seeing.Asexual attraction is obviously present between them, and Linklater handles itgently, with patience. There is a wonderful scene in the listening booth of amusic store, where each one looks at the other, and then looks away, so as notto be caught. The way they do this - the timing, the slight embarrassment - is delicateand true to life. And I liked their first kiss, on the same ferris wheel usedin "The Third Man," so much I didn't mind that they didn't know OrsonWelles and Joseph Cotten had been there before them.Thecity of Vienna is presented as a series of meetings and not as a travelogue.They meet amateur actors, fortunetellers, street poets, friendly bartenders.They spend some time in a church at midnight. They drink wine in a park. Theyfind a way to exchange personal information by holding imaginary phone callswith imaginary best friends. They talk about making love. There are goodarguments for, and against.Thisis Linklater's third film, after "Slacker' (1991) and "Dazed andConfused" (1993). He's onto something. He likes the way ordinary timeunfolds for people, as they cross paths, start talking, share their thoughtsand uncertain philosophies. His first movie, set in Austin, Texas, followed onecharacter until he met a second, then the second until he met a third, and soon, eavesdropping on one life and conversation after another. The second filmwas a long night at the end of a high school year, as the students regardedtheir futures. Now there's "Before Sunrise," about two nice kids,literate, sensitive, tentative, intoxicated by the fact that their livesstretch out before them, filled with mystery and hope, and maybe love.NOTE:The R rating for this film, based on a few four-letter words, is entirelyunjustified. It is an ideal film for teenagers.
