"Congo" is a splendid example of a genre no longermuch in fashion, the jungle adventure story. Perhaps aware that its materialwas already dated when Stewart Granger made "King Solomon's Mines" in1950, the filmmakers have cheerfully turned it into an action comedy, and theactors have gone a step further, treating it like one of those movies like"Beat the Devil" that is a put-on of itself. The result is not amovie that is very good, exactly, but it's entertaining and funny. Falsesophisticates will scorn it. Real sophisticates will relish it. Themovie begins with a ludicrous set-up featuring Joe Don Baker, chewing thescenery (and I believe even the foundations of the sound stage) as amegalomaniac tycoon who needs a rare African diamond to build a laser systemthat will "dominate the communications industry!" His son Charlieseems to have discovered the diamond lode before his satellite transmission isknocked off the air by what look like killer gorillas.Bakerpersuades an assistant, Karen (Laura Linney), to go into the jungle to find outwhat happened to Charlie, and to bring back the diamonds. The diamonds seemmore important than his son. She accused him of not being human. "I'll behuman later!" he barks.Forvery complicated reasons, Karen merges her mission with an expedition beingmounted by a "primologist" (Dylan Walsh), who has taught an ape tocommunicate by using American Sign Language to activate a speech synthesizer.Also along for the ride is a shadowy, sinister figure named Herkermer Homolka(Tim Curry), who introduces himself as a "Rumanian philanthropist,"but has in fact staged a lifelong quest for the jewels of the lost city ofZinge. He has the Peter Lorre role.Areyou following this? I realize only a very particular kind of filmgoer is likelyto relate to this movie: one raised on Saturday matinees, with a good sense ofthe absurd and an appreciation for movie clichés. Curry's first appearance getsa laugh, for example, even before he says anything, because he glowers sopregnantly. And an ideal audience will also enjoy the scene where Charlie looksover his shoulder, sees something, and screams before the screen turns black.And the scene where Karen kicks open the door of a DC-3 and shoots down anti-aircraftfire with a flare gun. And lines like "Why are they putting onparachutes?" And, in the middle of the jungle, the classic, ominous line,"Two of our porters have run away." And the shot of the hand of acorpse clutching a big diamond.Thekey actor in the African sequences is Ernie Hudson, as Monroe Kelly, the localguide, who described himself as "a great white hunter who happens to beblack." In a droll performance that is perfectly suited to the material,Hudson resembles Clark Gable and, yes, Stewart Granger in his ability tomaintain a sardonic detachment and calm courage while (a) being attacked bykiller apes while (b) the ground opens up under him during a volcanicearthquake, and (c) rivers of molten lava head in his direction.Manyof the other best moments belong to Amy the gorilla, created by effects makeupartist Stan Winston, who enjoys a martini on the plane ("She's allowedone; it will calm her down") and later amazes the African gorillas byinforming them, in synthesized speech, that her name is Amy and they are ugly.Theclosing action sequences, involving the lost city of Zinge, the volcaniceruption and the attack of the killer apes, is in the tradition of the IndianaJones movies, although the traffic direction isn't as good and a lot moreporters disappear without being accounted for. The movie was directed by FrankMarshall, who has worked with Steven Spielberg on his action extravaganzas, andis based on a novel by Michael Crichton, who is said to be unhappy about whatthey've done with his book. Since it is impossible to imagine this materialbeing played for anything but laughs, maybe he should be grateful.
