Under a gray and brooding sky, Stephen King's Maine brings forthyet another labyrinthine tragedy in "Dolores Claiborne." This is ahorror story, all right, but not a supernatural one; all of the elements comeout of such everyday horrors as alcoholism, wife beating, child abuse and thesin of pride. The non-supernatural movies based on King stories ("Stand byMe," "Misery," "The Shawshank Redemption" and thisone) are curious in that they deal with unhappy situations, and yet somehowdon't turn audiences off - maybe because the characters are so strongly drawn. Herewe have a story involving a hardworking housekeeper named Dolores (Kathy Bates)and the daughter she hasn't seen for 15 years, a New York magazine writer namedSelena (Jennifer Jason Leigh). One day Selena gets a fax of an article from theBangor, Maine, paper, about a woman suspected of murder. Scrawled across thecover page are the words, "Isn't this your mother?" Although she hasa big assignment in Arizona she desperately wants to cover, Selena ventures tothe Maine island where her mother awaits possible booking for the crime. Shearrives in the kind of town where the motels close all winter, everybody knowsone another, and people still say, "Oh, my gravy!" But theprosecuting attorney is from the mainland and has cold eyes. His name is Mackey(Christopher Plummer), and his accent starts out folksy but turns chilling.Wein the audience have already seen the fatal event, in the title sequence, andit sure did look like Dolores pushed that poor old lady down the stairs, andthen was fixing to bash her head in with a marble rolling pin, just when themailman interrupted the crime. But maybe there is another way of looking at themurder - andat the death, 15years ago, of Dolores' husband and Selena's father, a mean drunk who died afterfalling down a well.Doloresworked for ages for the old lady, a perfectionist named Vera Donovan (JudyParfitt), who demanded "six clothespins, not five" on every sheet,and wanted them hung outside on the line, even in deepest winter. Maybe she hada motive for killing her. The mother and her daughter move back into theramshackle family home, and we discover that Selena uses a lot of booze, pillsand cigarettes to keep the lid on the kinds of stresses that are caused bycigarettes, pills and booze. She has little regard for her mother and may evenbelieve the woman had something to do with the father's death.Morethan this I dare not say. "Dolores Claiborne" is the kind of moviewhere every corner of the house and lawn contains its own flashback, tolong-ago events that look differently, depending on your angle. And muchdepends on what happened on a day when there was a six-minute total eclipse ofthe sun (King is big on eclipses), and how the drunken dad (David Strathairn)ended up down that well.Giventhe level of melodrama in this story, it's surprising how much it turns into atwo-character drama. Bates and Leigh are well-matched here, as mother anddaughter with a long history of deep hurts and suspicions. There is no falsesentimentality, and - more important - no false theatrics in theirrelationship: They are bitter, taciturn Maine people, with a lot of sharedhurt. So complete is their chemistry that a subplot involving Selena's New Yorkjob and editor is an unnecessary distraction.It'ssometimes distracting to tell a story in flashbacks and memories; the storyline gets sidetracked. The director, Taylor Hackford, is successful, however,in making the present seem to flow into and out of the past. He is helped bythe uncanny resemblance between Leigh and Ellen Muth, the actress who plays heras a young girl. And a key story thread is made much more convincing by acouple of key speeches, wonderfully delivered by Judy Parfitt as the exactingbut not evil old lady. (The movie assigns her one of several repetitions of themovie's dialogue riff, which is, "sometimes being a bitch is all a womanhas to hold on to.") Sticklers for detail may wonder about the final scenebefore a local magistrate. Isn't a lot being taken for granted, not only aboutthe current death but also about the past one? It seemed to me the plot stirredup more than it settled, but Tony Gilroy's screenplay satisfied me with oneperfect speech by Leigh, which ends, "whatever you did, I know you did itfor me." Stephen King fans hoping for ghouls and satanic subplots andbizarre vastations may be disappointed by "Dolores Claiborne." I wassurprised how affecting the movie was, mostly because Bates and Leigh formedsuch a well-matched and convincing pair. Does this movie creep up on you? Oh,my gravy.
