“Jeet?" a character asks in "Federal Hill." It'shis way of asking, "Did you eat?" If he wanted to say, "Did youever eat?" it would be "Jever eat?" The movie has a good ear forthe way the characters talk, dress, move and live; it's anotherItalian-American slice-of-life, well acted and directed. When Martin Scorsesemade "Who's That Knocking at My Door?" in 1967, did he know he wascreating a genre and providing work for three decades of actors? The movietakes place in Providence, R.I., where local Italian-American kids like Nickyand Ralphie (Anthony De Sando and Nicholas Turturro) have little in common withthe sleek, upper-crust kids who attend Brown University. There are littleclass-conscious signs of that all through the film; for example, a well-writtenrestaurant scene implies that if you are going to be fluent in Italian, it isbetter to have learned it in school than from your grandparents. Nickyis a hustling kid around town who works in his father's car lot, likes toborrow Cadillac ragtops for the evening and deals a little cocaine to make endsmeet. Ralphie is his best friend, "like a brother to me." Ralph infact may secretly think of himself as more than a brother to Nicky; there aremany clues that he has homosexual feelings, which he masks with tough talk andwith a nasty episode of gay-bashing. (Jever notice how the most homophobicmember of any crowd is always the one who is most adamant about hanging outwith the guys?) Ralphie works construction, sort of. His father, who prideshimself on being a great bricklayer, is a manic-depressive who sometimes sinksinto deep glooms ("You know how your father gets," a foreman tellsthe son). Ralphie lavishes great care and love on the old man, but no less careand love on Nicky, whom he looks after protectively. When Nicky meets Wendy, acoed from Brown (Libby Langdon), Ralphie is deeply jealous.Hewarns his buddy that she's just a rich college girl looking for a little localaction and a source of cocaine, but maybe he's wrong. Wendy is one of thosemodern women who takes as much as she gives, and far from being the mindlessobject of Nicky's lust, she's sexually demanding, once surprising him byinitiating sex in the stacks of the school library.Nickyloves this girl. When he learns she's going to Italy for the summer on a fieldtrip, he fantasizes about going along, as cook and interpreter. (He is, infact, an excellent cook, whose seduction techniques begin with a plate ofperfect linguini.) While Nicky's romance progresses, Ralphie gets into deeptrouble. He's a housebreaker with kinky tastes who, in a half-witted attempt tohelp a friend, has broken into the houses of three "made" men in theMafia.Thisis not a wise thing to do. He moves in circles a lot tougher than he is;visiting a fence, he is almost shot coming through the door, inspiring theclassic line, "Jeez, I almost put one in you, buddy! Come on in!"Ralphie finds himself in deep trouble with Sal (Frank Vincent), the local boss,and that leads to an ironic scene in which Sal's son finds himself uncomfortablewith the opportunity to "earn his bones." "Federal Hill"covers familiar ground, but with feeling and style. Writer-director MichaelCorrente is not just treading in Scorsese's footsteps but testing new ground,especially in the subplots involving Ralph's father and the unexaminedcloseness between Ralph and Nick. The series of ironic developments at the endof the movie feels a little like movie plotting, yes, but Corrente has set themup well enough to get away with them. Y'know?
