Sylvester Stallone is one of the great physical actors in themovies, with a gift for throwing himself so fearlessly into an action scenethat we can't understand why somebody doesn't really get hurt. When he explodesnear the beginning of “First Blood”, hurling cops aside and breaking out of ajail with his fists and speed, it's such a convincing demonstration of physicalstrength and agility that we never question the scene's implausibility. Infact, although almost all of “First Blood” is implausible, because it'sStallone on the screen, we'll buy it. What we can't buy in this movie is the message.It's handled in too heavy-handed a way. Stallone plays a returned Vietnamveteran, a Green Beret skilled in the art of jungle survival and fighting, andafter a small-town police force sadistically mishandles him, he declares war onthe cops. All of this is set up in scenes of great physical power and strength andthe central sections of the movie, with Stallone and the cops stalking eachother through the forests of the Pacific Northwest, have a lot of authority.But then the movie comes down to a face-off between Stallone and his old GreenBeret commander (Richard Crenna), and the screenplay gives Stallone a long,impassioned speech to deliver, a speech in which he cries out against theinjustices done to him and against the hippies who demonstrated at the airportwhen he returned from the war, etc. This is all old, familiar material from adozen other films clichés recycled as formula. Bruce Dern did it in “ComingHome” and William Devane in “Rolling Thunder”. Stallone is made to say thingsthat would have much better been implied; Robert De Niro, in “Taxi Driver”,also plays a violent character who was obviously scarred by Vietnam, but themovie wisely never makes him talk about what happened to him. Some things arescarier and more emotionally moving when they're left unsaid. So the ending doesn't work in “First Blood”. Itdoesn't necessarily work as action, either. By the end of the film, Stallonehas taken on a whole town and has become a one-man army, laying siege to thepolice station and the hardware store and exploding the pumps at the gasstation. This sort of spectacular conclusion has become so commonplace inaction movies that I kind of wonder, sometimes, what it would be like to seeone end with a whimper rather than a bang. Until the last twenty or thirty minutes,however, “First Blood” is a very good movie, well-paced, and well-acted notonly by Stallone (who invests an unlikely character with great authority) butalso by Crenna and Brian Dennehy, as the police chief. The best scenes come asStallone's on the run in the forest, using a hunting knife with a compass inthe handle, and living off the land. At one point he's trapped on a cliffsideby a police helicopter, and we really feel for this character who has beenhunted down through no real fault of his own. We feel more deeply for him then,in fact, than we do later when he puts his grievances into words. Stallonecreates the character and sells the situation with his presence itself. Thescreenplay should have stopped while it was ahead.
