"You gotta get that `We are the world' crap outta yourhead. 'Causeit ain't gonna happen on this campus." Dialogue in "HigherLearning" T he college campus in John Singleton's new film is a racial andideological war zone, where students rarely talk to other students who are notmore or less just like themselves. Early in the film, a black freshman is givena tour of the turfs staked out by various racial groups: "There'sChinatown...the Black Hole...Disneyland...Southof the Border..." The enforced segregation of the past has been replacedby a new, voluntary xenophobia, and the result is a dreary place in whichpeople define themselves by negatives.Theinstitution is named Columbus University (named after the Dead White EuropeanMale whose "discovery" of America led to genocide, etc., etc.). It isnot safe to walk the campus grounds after dark. The Students for a Non-SexistSociety promotes mottos like "Dead Men Don't Rape." And this is notsome futurist Orwellian nightmare, but a more or less realistic picture of thePolitically Correct modern campus. It is easy to imagine that in a facultyoffice, David Mamet's "Oleanna" is taking place.Intothis sanctuary of self-enforced apartheid comes a new freshman class. Itincludes a young black man named Malik (Omar Epps,) a young white woman namedKristen (Kristy Swanson), and a young white man named Remy (Michael Rapaport).They are here, allegedly, to learn, but most of their most important lessonswill be taught by the campus itself. The only classroom we enter is ruled bythe most conservative character in view: Professor Phipps (Laurence Fishburne),the pipe-smoking West Indian who refuses to play favorites and has the quaintidea that all students should be judged only on the basis of their performance.Singleton'sfilm is interesting for a lot of reasons, but especially because he standsoutside this campus system and looks at it with a detached eye. Like SpikeLee's "School Daze," Singleton's "Higher Learning" isidealistic in a way that seems refreshingly dated: He believes the campusshould allow students from different races and places to get to know oneanother, instead of compartmenting them into rigid self-righteousness. At atime when some believe only blacks should teach black studies and the ideas ofdead white European males should hardly be taught at all, this is almostradical.Singletonhimself, at 26, is only a few years out of USC, and his film is at home on thecampus. Looking through the eyes of the incoming freshmen, we go through theprocess of moving in, meeting roommates, taking the first classes, andsocializing. For Kristen, the first week is a nightmare. She meets a cute guyat abeer blast, goes home withhim, and is a victim of date rape.Singleton'shandling of this scene is perceptive; he shows the outcome predicted even inits earliest stages ("You think we should let Kristen go with Billy?'Cause she doesn't even drink"). It shows Billy's own confusion, and theway booze contributes to it. And it sets up a subplot, as the shattered Kristenis befriended by Taryn (Jennifer Connelly), head of a feminist group and alesbian who Kristen will eventually consider as a possible lover.Taryndoesn't "recruit" Kristen exactly, although she has her eye on her.The first night that Kristen seems attracted, Taryn even warns her: "Don'tsay yes simply because you're fascinated." Singleton is making a largerpoint, about how young freshmen seek role models on a campus, and are singledout by older students who take advantage of their naiveté.Malik,the black student, is soon in conversation with Fudge (Ice Cube), a"professional student" who has been on campus six years and affectsan Afrocentric position. And Remy, the scared young white kid with the confusedeyes, is singled out by a clever, demented neo-Nazi skinhead (Cole Hauser) whocorrectly guesses he might be capable of violence.Eachof these older students is supporting a position. Fudge sees himself at warwith white America, and quizzes Malik on whether he would stand during theNational Anthem "in a football stadium, with 60,000 eyes on you."Taryn believes men can basically not be trusted. The skinhead envisions racewar as a worthy goal, believes the campus is a good place to start, andsuspects his freshman recruit might be crazy enough to pull a trigger.Standingapart from all of these factions, in a performance all the more effectivebecause it is so subtle, is Laurence Fishburne as Professor Phipps. He persistsin seeing each student as an individual, apart from his or her group. He hasonly one standard for grading. Malik, recruited to the campus as a potentialtrack star, feels himself out of depth in Phipps' class and tries to play theblack card, but Phipps isn't playing: He would not be doing Malik a favor, heexplains, by holding him to a lower standard. So Malik works harder, tutored byhis new girlfriend Deja (Tyra Banks), and is eventually able to turn in adecent paper.Meanwhile,a sense of impending doom hangs over the campus.Allof these groups with all of their agendas are headed for a collision. Singletondoes a good job of cutting back and forth between many stories; this is not a"black movie" but sees the whole campus population as its subject.Hehandles the subplot involving the neo-Nazis especially effectively; skinheadslend themselves to parody, but in Cole Hauser and Michael Rapaport, Singletonhas cast two effective actors who bring a chilling plausibility to their roles.Rapaport plays a big, confused kid who looks like a rabbit caught inheadlights, and Hauser, with his cynical charm and insinuating drawl, is like asnake-charmer."HigherLearning" is Singleton's third film, after the great "Boyz N theHood" (1991) and the more meandering, romantic "Poetic Justice"(1993). He may be following, in some way, the threads of his own autobiography,in these three films about teenagers in South Central Los Angeles, young peopleworking for the post office, and now freshmen in college. He sees with a cleareye and a strong will, and is not persuaded by fashionable ideologies. Hismovies are thought-provoking because he uses familiar kinds of characters andthen asks hard questions about them."HigherLearning" has no easy answers. In an opening scene, when the blackfreshman gets on an elevator with the young white student, she instinctivelyclutches her purse tighter. In a closing scene, we see them able to talk witheach other in the aftermath of a campus tragedy. She doesn't remember themoment in the elevator. He does. But life goes on, and why does a campus exist,except for learning?
