“It's My Party” is gentle, and very sad, the story of a man whodiscovers that he has a short time to live, and throws a party for family andfriends, so that he can say goodbye before committing suicide. The story is notso concerned with his disease or his decision as with recording the emotionaltones that surround it, and watching the film is uncannily like going throughthe illness, death and memorial service of a loved one. The dying man is Nick Stark (Eric Roberts). He has beenHIV-positive for eight years. Now he experiences a series of small, troublingsigns. He forgets his keys. He drops a barbell at the gym. “Get the scan,” afriend says, and he does, and the test finds lesions on his brain. The fullname of his condition is Progressive Multifocal Leukoencephalopathy, and it isdepressing to discover that some of his friends can rattle that term right off.Nick,a designer, was the lover for many years of Brandon (Gregory Harrison), a TVdirector, but they broke up after Nick tested positive. Painful flashbacks showthem fighting over their house and dog; Brandon brought most of the money tothe relationship, and so it was Nick who moved out, to a little frame housewhere the final party will be held. Telling his closest friends (includingCharlene, played by Margaret Cho) that it is “Time for Plan B” and he wants todie “while I am still me,” he goes through his Rolodex, making an invitationlist: “Dead... dead... dull... dead...” The centerpiece of the movie isRoberts' performance as the dying man. This is a quieter, gentler Eric Robertsthan I've seen before. As the friends and family start to gather, he tries tocomfort them, bringing to each one what he senses they need. There is somelaughter and a few macabre jokes, but basically the party (which stretches totwo days because of some latecomers) consists of Nick at the epicenter, braveand sweet, surrounded in the corners of the rooms by many worried and sadconversations.“Gaypeople get to choose their own families,” one of Nick's friends says, “and hechose us.” His biological family is also there: Lee Grant, as his Greek mother,George Segal, as his Jewish father, and Marlee Matlin as his sister. It isclear, in a conversation they have, that his father never accepted Nick’shomosexuality, and buried that and other issues in lifelong alcoholism.Thefather tries to apologize, awkwardly.Thekey event of the party is the arrival of Brandon, the former lover.Nick'sfriends are hostile to him: They think he has his nerve. But Charlene invitedhim because she senses that Nick will be happy to see him, and although thereis still anger and resentment, she is right. “When he got sick, I guess I gotscared,” Brandon confesses.Theidea of voluntary suicide, much in the news because of Dr.Kevorkian,is treated here not as an issue but as an accepted choice. In another flashback,we see how Nick and others helped a friend of theirs who chose to kill himself.They leave him to die, and the next day they go to deal with the body, only todiscover that he is not yet quite dead. So they follow through.Thisscene will cause the most discussion after the film, and indeed within the filmRoddy McDowall plays a Catholic who argues that only God should decide when wedie.ForNick, whose vision is blurring and whose memory is fading, the choice seemsclear. By the end of the film, in a quiet, understated way, director and writerRandal Kleiser has created a genuine family feeling. This is not one of thoseover-plotted constructions in which every character poses a problem, and thescreenplay assigns solutions. It's more three-dimensional and realistic,showing how death, for all of its sadness, can sometimes create joy, if peopleare given the opportunity to affirm what they feel for one another. It is notan end, but a passage. And some things finally get said that needed to be saida long time earlier.
