There are a couple of moments in “Jerry Maguire” when you wantto hug yourself with delight. One comes when a young woman stands up in anoffice where a man has just been fired because of his ethics, and says, yes,she'll follow him out of the company. The other comes when she stands in herkitchen and tells her older sister that she really, truly, loves a man with herwhole heart and soul. Bothof those moments involve the actress Renee Zellweger, whose lovability is oneof the key elements in a movie that starts out looking cynical and quicklybecomes a heart warmer.Theman she follows, and loves, is Jerry Maguire (Tom Cruise), a high-powered prosports agent who has so many clients he can't really care about any of them. Hespends most of his time as a road warrior, one of those dogged joggers you seein airports, racking up the frequent flyer miles in pursuit of the excellencethey read about in pin brained best-sellers. One night he has a panic attack ina lonely hotel room, and writes a memo titled “The Things We Think and Do NotSay: The Future of Our Business.” One of the things he thinks is that agentsshould be less concerned about money and more concerned about their clients.That gets him a standing ovation in the office, but a few days later, when he'sfired, he understands why agents do not say those things they think. Maguirestages a grandstand exit (his decision to take along the office goldfish playsawkwardly, however). But when he asks who's walking out with him, only Dorothy,an accountant he's met just once at the airport, stands up and says shebelieves in him. Dorothy is a widow with a cute little son (maybe just a mitetoo cute).Shealso has an outspoken older sister, played by Bonnie Hunt with her usualexuberance and ironic cheer (she's almost always a delight to watch). Thesisters live together in a house where the living room seems to be semipermanently filled by a kvetching self-help group for divorced women, who spendall of their time talking about men. Someone should tell them that resentmentis just a way of letting someone else use your mind rent-free.Onlyone client doesn't dump Maguire when the agency boots him out. That's RodTidwell (Cuba Gooding Jr.), a wide receiver for Arizona, who resents the crappywaterbed commercials Maguire puts him in, but sticks with him anyway. Rod'swife Marcee (Regina King) is her husband's shrewdest defender and biggest fan,and their marriage is a true love story--in contrast to Maguire's failingengagement to the power-mad Avery Bishop (Kelly Preston).Averyis soon out of the picture, Dorothy begins to look less like an accountant andmore like the most wonderful woman in the world, and under the influence of hisennobling new feelings, Jerry helps Rod learn to play from the heart and notjust from the mind and the pocketbook. And somewhere along in there I began tofeel that writer-director Cameron Crowe had bitten off more than he reallyneeded to chew. The screenplay knows enough about sports agents to make thatthe subject of the whole film, and enough about romance, too, but there are somany subplots that “Jerry Maguire” seems too full: Less might have been more.Still,the film is often a delight, especially when Cruise and Zellweger are togetheron the screen. He plays Maguire with the earnestness of a man who wants to findgreatness and happiness in an occupation where only success really counts. Sheplays a woman who believes in this guy she loves, and reminds us that true loveis about idealism. (Remember Franklin McCormick years ago on the all-nightradio? “I love you because of who you are--and who I am when I am with you.”)The actual sports scenes are more predictable (right down to and including thebig play that settles the season). But Cuba Gooding Jr., so strong in “Boyz Nthe Hood,” is fine here in a much different role. Finally the movie is abouttransformation: About two men who learn how to value something more importantthan money, and about two women who always knew.
