“Miami Rhapsody" has been dismissed in some quarters as animitation Woody Allen movie, but since the imitation and the movie are both soentertaining, I don't see what the problem is. Allen himself has made unabashedpastiches in the style of Fellini ("Stardust Memories"), Bergman("Interiors") and German Expressionism ("Shadows and Fog"),and now here is David Frankel's takeon Allen's comedies about the moral qualms of the affluent. Justto make clear he knows exactly what he's doing, Frankel stars Mia Farrow,Allen's former muse, in a key role. And he opens the picture with a close-up ofanother character delivering a monologue to her psychiatrist. This isWoodyland, all right, and my guess is that if this were a Woody Allen film, itwould be reviewed as a pretty good one. Not great, but pretty good.Themovie stars Sarah Jessica Parker as Gwyn, the middle child of the Marcusfamily, affluent Jewish Miamians. She is engaged to be married to Matt (GilBellows), a zoologist who dreams of living in the rain forest, presumably withGwyn, and studying the intimate lives of simians. But before that can happen,Gwyn finds herself doing a little psychological zoology involving the intimatelives of her family.Ather sister's wedding, she's told by her father, Vic (Paul Mazursky), that hesuspects her mother, Nina (Farrow), is having an affair. This turns out to bequite true; Nina confesses to having fallen for Tony (Antonio Banderas), thehandsome Latin-American male nurse who is caring for her mother in a nursinghome.Gwynhas always considered her parents' marriage perfect, and her faith in theinstitution of marriage is shaken by Nina's secret, which turns out to be thetip of the iceberg.Inquick succession, Gwyn discovers that Vic himself is having an affair, with histravel agent. That her brother Jordan (Kevin Pollak) is cheating with hispartner's wife (Naomi Campbell).Thateven her newly married sister Leslie (Carla Gugino), bored with herfootball-hero husband and appalled by his stinginess, is seeing an oldboyfriend.Howcan it be possible, Gwyn wonders, for her to commit to an institution thateveryone around her is undermining? And . . . could it just possibly be truethat the handsome Tony would rather date Gwyn than her mother? I realize thisplot synopsis makes "Miami Rhapsody" sound like a screwball comedywith couples popping in and out of bed.Whatis rather impressive is the way Frankel, who wrote as well as directed, is ableto bring levels of truth, poignancy and pain to what begins as a fairlymechanical plot. He does this by making most of the characters self-aware; ifthey're doing wrong, to some degree they realize that, and learn from it. Andin Gwyn's grandmother, a Holocaust survivor who never speaks but yet somehowcasts rays of cheerfulness and love on all about her, he provides a moralcenter: a person whose example causes most of the characters to think twicebefore descending into heedless selfishness.Ofcourse, probably not all of the marriages should be saved. The football star(Bo Eason), who seems like a nice guy until he gets married, turns out to be soself-absorbed he doesn't see why any of his money should be spent by his wife.We understand why she strays.Butthe other adulterers really belong with their original spouses, and with themoral neatness of a comedy by Shakespeare, Frankel manages to restore order andbalance by the end.Frankel'sdialogue is smart and topical, although it aims at a slightly lowerintellectual level than Allen's screenplays, maybe because the movie is set inMiami, where people are more likely to discuss politics than philosophy."You kids tend to put me up on a pedestal," Farrow complains toParker, who replies, "You lowered it the year you voted for Bush."Miami itself is almost one of the characters in the film.JackWallner's cinematography uses its tropical colors and Art Deco architecture tocreate a pulsing backdrop, and there's the sense that the characters are just alittle warmer, faster and more lustful here than they might be up north.Parkerhas a line that could have been spoken by the Allen of "Annie Hall":"I look at marriage the same way I look at Miami: It's hot and stormy andsometimes a little dangerous - but if it's so awful, then why is there so muchtraffic?"
