Much has already been written about the bravery of “Missing”,which dares, we are told, to make a specific attack on American policies inChile during and after the Allende regime. I wish the movie had been even braveenough to risk a clear, unequivocal, uncompromised statement of its beliefs,instead of losing itself in a cluttered mishmash of stylistic excesses. Thismovie might have really been powerful, if it could have gotten out of its ownway. The story involves the disappearance in theearly 1970s of a young American journalist in a country (not named) that isobviously intended to be Chile. The young man and his wife (played by John Sheaand Sissy Spacek) have gone down there to live, write, and absorb the localcolor. But then a civil war breaks out, martial law is declared, troops roamthe streets, and one day soldiers come and take the young man away. The movieis the record of the frustrating attempts by Spacek and her father-in-law (JackLemmon) to discover what happened to the missing man. It suggests that theyoung American might have been on some sort of informal hit list of left-wingforeign journalists, that he was taken away and killed, and that (this is thecontroversial part) American embassy officials knew about his fate and may evenhave been involved in approving his death. If that was indeed the case, then it is a causefor great anger and dismay. And the best scenes in "Missing", theones that make this movie worth seeing despite its shortcomings are the ones inwhich Spacek and Lemmon hack their way through a bureaucratic jungle in anattempt to get someone to make a simple statement of fact. Those scenes aremasterful. The U.S. embassy officials are painted as dishonest weasels,shuffling papers, promising immediate action, and lying through their teeth.Lemmon and Spacek are about as good an example of Ordinary Americans as you canfind in a movie, and their flat voices and stubborn determination and eventheir initial dislike for one another all ring exactly true. If "Missing" hadstarted with the disappearance of the young man, and had followed Spacek andLemmon in a straightforward narrative as they searched for him, this moviemight have generated overwhelming tension and anger. But the movie neverdevelops the power it should have had, because the director, ConstantinCosta-Gavras, either lacked confidence in the strength of his story, or had toomuch confidence in his own stylistic virtuosity. He has achieved the unhappyfeat of upstaging his own movie, losing it in a thicket of visual and editingstunts. Let's begin with the most annoying example ofhis meddling. “Missing” contains scenes that take place before the young mandisappears. We see his domestic happiness with his wife and friends, we see himreading from The Little Prince and making plans for the future. The fact thatthis material is in the movie suggests, at least, that the story is being toldby an omniscient author, one who can also tell us, if he wishes to, whathappened to the victim. But he does not. Costa-Gavras shows us all sorts ofominous warnings of approaching trouble (including a lot of loose talk byAmerican military men who are not supposed to be in the country, but are, andall but claim credit for a coup). He shows us a tragic aftermath of martiallaw, guns in the streets, vigilante justice, and the chilling sight of rowafter row of dead young men, summarily executed by the new junta. But he doesnot show us what happened to make the film's hero disappear. Or, rather, heshows us several versions, visual fantasies in which the young husband isarrested at home by a lot of soldiers, or a few, and is taken away in this wayor that. These versions are pegged to the unreliable eyewitness accounts of thepeople who live across the street. They dramatize an uncertain human fate in atime of upheaval, but they also distract fatally from the flow of the film. By the time “Missing” begins its crucial lasthalf-hour, a strange thing has happened. We care about this dead American, andhis wife and father, almost despite the movie. The performances of Spacek andLemmon carry us along through the movie's undisciplined stylistic displays. Butat the end of the film, there isn't the instant discharge of anger we felt atthe end of Costa-Gavras's great “Z” (1969), because the narrative juggernaut ofthat film has been traded in for what is basically just a fancy meditation onthe nature of reality. Something happened to the missing young man (his storyis based on real events). Somebody was guilty, and somebody was lying, and hewas indeed killed. But “Missing” loses its way on the road to thoseconclusions, and at the end Lemmon and Spacek seem almost to mourn alone, whilethe crew is busy looking for its next shot.
