“You're too darn sad-looking to just be another retard in a pinkvisor,” the customer tells the fast-food clerk. That leads into a conversation,and in no time at all they're in bed together, and he's telling her the storyof his life--which, in recent years, played more like his slow and agonizingdeath. The guy with the drive-thru job is Jerry Stahl (Ben Stiller),who at one point was making $5,000 a week as a TV writer in Hollywood. Nicework, unless your drug habit is running you $6,000 a week. It's a true story.The movie “Permanent Midnight,” based on the autobiography of Stahl, tells howhis life spiraled into increasing desperation, even while his TV bosses let himget away with almost everything--as long as he produced.Stahl, a smart guy with good ideas, gets his TV job throughSandra (Elizabeth Hurley), a British woman he marries for money so she can geta green card. His first job interview goes strangely. “I'm wondering if yourmind can function down at our level,” muses his prospective boss (FredWillard). Asked what he thinks about the show (a puppetcast named “Mr. Chompers”),he insults the show and is hired. Soon he's turning his own life into fodderfor comedy; his father's suicide is recycled into an episode.The story of every drunk or addict is different in the detailsbut similar in the outlines: Their days revolve around finding and using asufficient supply of their substance of choice to avoid acute mental andphysical discomfort. Eventually it gets to the point where everythingelse--job, family, self-image--is secondary. Stahl steals drugs from themedicine cabinet of his friends (“If I was Percodan, where would I be?”) andbuys drugs from very dangerous people. (He's safe only because there's moremoney in customers who are not dead.) He shoots up in risky places, issometimes caught or almost caught, and finds his anger mounting because it isso very hard and exhausting to get high all the time.There are bizarre episodes at work and in his private life,where the green card girl inexplicably begins to take a liking to him, getspregnant and finds out too late that he is the wrong pony to bet on. One day,in desperation, she begs him to baby-sit. He sticks the kid in the car and goeslooking for drugs; he's eventually stopped by the cops, who arrest him and callFamily Services for the child. Does he learn his lesson? Does it help that whenhe gets out of rehab a friendly dealer (Peter Greene) is waiting to sell himdrugs in the parking lot? The story in “Permanent Midnight” has been told manytimes in many forms. Someday I'd like to see a movie based on Julia Phillips'harrowing memoir, You'll Never Have Lunch in This Town Again. What Ben Stillerbrings to the role is a kind of savage impatience. His character stabs his bodyanywhere with the needle--even in the neck--because the niceties are no longerof interest to a man who simply needs to get the stuff into his veins rightaway.The movie gets credit for not making the high life seem colorfulor funny. It is not. It is boring, because when the drugs are there they simplyclear the pain and allow the mind to focus on getting more drugs. Stahl doesn'tseek drugs because he wants to feel good but because he wants to stop feelingbad. It isn't the high that makes people into addicts; it's the withdrawal.Last month I saw a revival of Otto Preminger's “The Man With theGolden Arm,” the first of Hollywood's drug movies, with Frank Sinatra in thetitle role. Sinatra got an Oscar nomination for the role, in which he portrayedthe pain of withdrawal. Stiller, playing Stahl, makes it look incomparablyworse. Either the drugs are getting stronger, or the actors are.
