Sometimes I get this Whitmanesque vision of America. But insteadof wheat fields and mighty cities and deep lakes stretching from sea to sea, Iimagine a vast number of coffee shops. And in these coffee shops, urgentconversations are taking place. Here's Mickey Rourke in Baltimore, talking withKevin Bacon in “Diner.” And Quentin Tarantino, on Santa Monica Boulevard,writing down ideas for “Pulp Fiction.” And Andy Garcia, in Denver, rehearsingfor “Things to Do in Denver When You're Dead.” And Pacino and De Niro, out nearthe LA airport, acting in their first scene together in “Heat.” And MarcAndreesson, in Urbana, inventing a surfer for the World Wide Web... Idoubt if there ever will be a movie named “Netscape 3.0,” but no matter; thenew American frontier is the all-night diner, with Formica tops and ketchup andsugar on every table, and a waitress who writes down your order on a green andwhite Guest Check. And in these coffee shops, which reach out like an endlessprogression of stops on the highway to fame, there are countless young men likethe heroes of “Swingers,” who are so near to stardom they can reach out andtouch it, and so far away they can't afford to pick up the check. “Swingers” isabout a loosely knit group of friends who hang out in Hollywood and hope tomake it big in the entertainment industry. “The hottest 1 percent of guys fromall over the world come to our gene pool,” they assure one another, althoughthat gives them better prospects for reproduction than success. One of theguys, named Trent (Vince Vaughn), uses the word “money” as an adjective: “That'sreally money. They'll see how money you are.” This is inspired, since inHollywood absolutely everything comes down to money. Intelligence, beauty,talent and fame go through a kind of universal currency exchange, and come outconverted into money, less 15 percent.Thefilm's hero is Mike (Jon Favreau), who wants to be a stand-up comic but has nojob prospects. A friend is weighing an offer to play Goofy at Disneyland (“Hey,at least it's Disney,” Trent observes). Mike mopes about Michelle, thegirlfriend he left behind back East, and Trent spends long hours with him inthe coffee shop of a Best Western, advising him that you cannot get a woman tocome back unless you're willing to forget her, after which, of course, youdon't care if she comes back.Themovie follows Mike, Trent and a shifting cast of friends through several days,during which they drive through the Hollywood Hills looking for parties atwhich Trent promises there will be lots of “honey babies” to pick up. Theyspend a lot of time playing an advanced version of video hockey. They golooking for hot clubs (“All the cool bars in Hollywood have to be real hard tofind and have no signs”). They try to pick up girls (Mike claims he's in showbiz, but the woman remembers seeing him in Starbucks, picking up an employmentapplication). In the middle of his angst, Mike more or less shuts down,cowering in his half-furnished apartment. Trent blasts him out with a midnightdrive to Las Vegas, where Mike has difficulty finding conversation openers (itdoesn't help to drop insights about the Age of Enlightenment). Amazingly, theypick up a couple of waitresses, who take them home (an Airstream trailer),where of course Mike blubbers about his former girlfriend.Theysay you should write about what you know. Doug Liman, who directed “Swingers,”and Favreau, who wrote it, obviously know a lot about young guys in Hollywoodsitting around in coffee shops talking about making it in show business. If youhad entered that Best Western coffee shop a year or two ago, you might actuallyhave seen them planning this movie. It's not a terribly original idea, but thenas one of the guys says, “Everybody steals from everybody” (this observation isclosely followed by shots cheerfully stolen from Scorsese's “Goodfellas” andTarantino's “Reservoir Dogs”). The movie is sweet, funny, observant and goofywith a small “g,” which means you don't get paid, but at least you don't haveto wear the suit.
