“The Governess” could be an illustration of the ideas inVirginia Woolf's A Room of One's Own, in which she marvels at how necessary itis for men to have women to feel superior to. The film tells the story of aneducated, spirited Jewish girl from London who, in the 1840s, finds work as agoverness on a remote Scottish island to support her family. She enters ahousehold where she is clearly the intellectual equal of the father, and thatis more than he can take--although he gives it a good try. Minnie Driver, grave and thoughtful between moments of highspirits and passion, plays Rosina, who grew up in a Sephardic Jewish communityin London. Her family life is richly cultured, but almost entirely cut off fromthe gentile world around her, and anti-Semitism is a fact of life. When herfather dies, she hopes to help her mother and sister, but there are fewprofessions open to her; it was a truism much beloved of Victorian noveliststhat a single woman in her position had three choices: marriage, domesticservice, or prostitution.She takes the middle choice, and, to sidestep discrimination,renames herself Mary Blackchurch, a Protestant whose part-Italian ancestryexplains her olive skin. She is hired by the Cavendish family of Scotland as agoverness for their unpleasant little girl Clementina. The father (TomWilkinson) is a man obsessed with the new science of photography, and spendslong hours in his studio and darkroom, as indeed anyone married to his ignorantand controlling wife (Harriet Walter) would have great inspiration to do. Thereis also a teenage boy, Henry (Jonathan Rhys Meyers), who falls instantly intolust for “Mary,” perhaps the first attractive girl he has seen.The governess is fascinated by Cavendish's photography--both theartistic side and the technical problem of fixing images so they do not fade.She spends long hours in his company, and they are drawn together, she by ahealthy interest in a smart and virile man, he struggling with the mossy ropesof Protestant guilt. Photography is the instrument of their mutual seduction;she insists on posing for him, her image on the negative a way of forcing himto see her as a woman and not just a servant.The film was written and directed by Sarah Goldbacher, who is, Iunderstand, the child of an Italian-Jewish father and a mother born on the veryisland where the film was shot. Although she sets the story at an earlier timein which all tensions and questions would have been heightened, there is nodoubt some autobiography here, especially in her character's determination toremain privately true to her Jewish heritage. Her affair with Cavendish isgiven additional irony by the likelihood that he would scorn her if he knew shewere Jewish.Minnie Driver is an actress who creates the illusion oferoticism, not through appearance but through behavior. She is of coursephysically attractive, but that isn't the point. Her characters have a way offocusing on men, on paying them observant attention, that causes them to grow alittle squirmy, and that's a sexy phenomenon. Many male actors feel that theirtask in romantic scenes is to seem powerful, attractive and in charge, when infact those are precisely the qualities that obscure what effect, if any, thewoman has on them.Tom Wilkinson (the proud foreman in “The Full Monty” and theoutraged Marquess of Queensberry in “Wilde”) shows Cavendish attracted to thisyoung woman despite his own best efforts, and that is ever so much more eroticthan a confident seduction.Photography provides the counterpoint: Their dance of attractionbegins at arm's length, through the pictures they take of each other. Theclaustrophobic, isolated Victorian household is a stage on which every nuance,however small, is noticed. And there are rich underlying ironies, not leastthat by denying their assigned places in society (he as a husband, she as aJew), they are able for a time to function freely just as two people happy tobe together in mind and body.
