Mira Nair's "The Perez Family" opens with aFellini-esque scene of elegantly dressed people promenading by a beach. Thenthe music turns sad as they begin to wade into the waves, and there's a cut toa Cuban prison. For Havana's bourgeoise, the good times are over. Cutto the early 1980s, and a boatload of prisoners released by Fidel Castro issailing for the United States. We meet Juan Raul Perez (Alfred Molina), whostill carries a flame of love in his heart for the wife he has not seen in 20years. Also on board is Dottie Perez (Marisa Tomei), a sometime hooker,determined to get a fresh start in the new land.Thesetwo Perezes are not related. Indeed, as Juan tells a U.S. immigration official(also named Perez), "If you want something done in this life, ask a Perez- there are so many of us!" They join thousands of other refugees in atemporary camp set up in Miami's football stadium, and when Dottie discoversthat families can find American sponsors more readily than single people, sheproposes to Juan that they become "married" to squeeze through animmigration loophole. To increase their chances, they even recruit a youngsterto be their son, and a dotty old man to be the grandfather.Juan goes along with the scheme, but only because he is so eagerto be reunited with his wife, Carmela Perez (Anjelica Huston), who got out ofCuba 20 years ago. They have been waiting for each other ever since, but nowthey may stumble just as they reach the finish line. Still on the boat, Juanfrets about his appearance after years in prison: "My teeth are too poorto kiss my wife." Dottie boldly kisses him. "Don't worry," shesays; "you can kiss your wife." "The Perez Family" makes aromantic comedy out of these offbeat ingredients, and although we have notoften seen such stories told about Cuban-Americans with political backgrounds,we have seen some of the same elements before, in screwball comedies. Whathappens is that just at the moment they are about to be reunited, both Juan andCarmela fall in love with others - but refuse to admit it.Theother key player in the cast is Chazz Palminteri, as Pirelli, a federal agentwho is working with the Miami police and finds himself making frequent visitsto Carmela's house when her alarm system keeps going off. The alarms have beeninstalled by her jealous brother, who goes ballistic when she gets near anyman. Carmela and Pirelli soon find that when the bells toll, they toll forthem. It's fairly clear early in the film what will happen, more or less. Thefun is in getting there.Therehas been controversy over the casting of so many non-Hispanic actors inHispanic roles in "The Perez Family" - and there was certainly noshortage of talented Latino actors for "My Family," a film releasedat about the same time. But maybe non-traditional casting is a two-way street;what's certain is that the actors bring real heart to their roles. Tomei inparticular has undergone some sort of transformation from her performances in"My Cousin Vinny" and "Only You," and now emerges asearthier and juicier. Anjelica Huston brings some of the same conflictingpassions to this role she had in "Prizzi's Honor," and Alfred Molina,a British actor, is surprisingly convincing as her husband.Thedirector, Mira Nair, is a New Yorker who was born in India. She has a specialinterest in new arrivals to America; her previous film, "MississippiMasala" (1992) was about a family of Indians from Uganda, operating amotel in the South. Here, she shows a good eye for the details of immigration,some of them fairly bizarre, as when the Miami Dolphins practice on the fieldof their stadium while the stands and entrance halls are jammed with thousandsof refugees.Thereare other details: The fake Perez "family" is moved out of thestadium, housed in a church rectory, and makes money by selling flowers at stopsigns. A U.S. immigration official, himself an immigrant from the Indiansubcontinent, is as bemused by the laws as anyone, but sworn to uphold them.And Carmela, now a Miami suburbanite with a daughter (Trini Alvarado) herhusband has never seen, is willing to say anything to be reunited with him.("She may be the most beautiful liar I have ever met," Palminterimuses).Themovie relies a little too much on contrivance sometimes. It'sbarely possible that Dottie dreams of making love to John Wayne soon after herarrival in America, and the scene where she finds out he is already dead is afunny one. But surely even in Cuba she would have known Elvis was also dead("Elvis, too? So many assassinations!"). The movie sometimes bendsthe plausible to set up a laugh, and most of the time I didn't care, because Iwas enjoying the company of the characters.
