Barbra Streisand's new film “The Mirror Has Two Faces”approaches the subject of marriage warily and with wit, like a George BernardShaw play; two articulate people talk circles around love for two acts beforefalling exhausted before the biological imperative in the third. Streisandplays Rose, a professor of literature who has more or less given up on hermarriage prospects, when she meets Gregory (Jeff Bridges), a man she reallylikes. He really likes her, too. The key words here are “really likes,” whichare not the same as “really loves.” Rose, 40ish in the movie, is in the dumpsbecause of the marriage of her sister (Mimi Rogers) to a handsome new husband(Pierce Brosnan). Rose's own dating circle seems to be limited to a nerd withan infectious grin (Austin Pendleton). Her sister, in desperation, answers a lonely-heartsad, and Rose and Gregory find themselves out on a date together. Gregoryis the kind of man who believes he cannot function well if he's in love. In anawkward and unconvincing early scene, he is giving a talk on mathematicaltheory when he spots his ex-wife in the audience, falters, blathers, and fleesfrom the stage. Desperate, he calls a phone sex line (for advice, not sex) andthat leads to his lonely-hearts ad and the big first date with Rose, at whichhe exclaims “beautiful!” as he looks at the sound waves on an oscilloscopewhile attending a concert.Later,they discuss prime numbers. He is amazed by how smart she is. She is amazed byhow much she is attracted to him. So attracted that when he proposes marriageshe agrees to his terms: No sex, no physical affection, just “a meeting of twominds”--respect and friendship and none of that messy stuff to get in the way.This works for a while, until she gets carried away and puts on a sexynightgown, and he locks himself in the bathroom.Thescreenplay, by Richard LaGravenese, based on an earlier French film, is like aShaw play--”Pygmalion,” in fact, except that this Higgins has nothing to teachhis Eliza, and she has everything to teach him. It's rare to find a film thatdeals intelligently with issues of sex and love, instead of just assuming thateveryone on the screen and in the audience shares the same popular cultureassumptions.It'srare, too, to find such verbal characters in a movie, and listening to themtalk is one of the pleasures of “The Mirror Has Two Faces.” There is awonderful scene in which Rose and her mother (Lauren Bacall) discuss beauty. Wesee a photograph of Bacall at about the age of 20, and we see Bacall now,beautiful in a different way, but old, and the daughter asks, “How did it feel?Being beautiful?” “It was wonderful,” her mother says, and we get the eerie andmagical sense that we are hearing Streisand and Bacall discussing this. Themother then produces a photo of a cute baby, which Streisand assumes is of hersister. But it's a picture of herself. “You were such a beautiful baby,” themother says, and Rose says, “Thanks for showing me this picture, mom.” It is agreat scene.Itleads to a dependable movie cliché, in which Rose transforms herself throughexercise, wardrobe and makeup, into a beauty. Gregory has left after theawkward sex showdown, but now he wants to come back, and she thinks maybe shecan seduce him. Transformation scenes are standard in the movies, but this onepays off in an unexpected way, leading to a payoff the movie works hard for,and earns.Somequibbles. Where is Streisand's family from? Streisand speaks with her usual NewYork accent, Bacall sounds mid-Atlantic, and Mimi Rogers sounds WASP as thesister. And although the Streisand character is articulate and intelligent inmost scenes, her intelligence level falters in the key scene intended toestablish it, as she lectures her Columbia lit students. She comes across morelike an inspirational after-dinner speaker with a standup comic's style thanlike a literature professor; in today's better schools, the students wouldquickly pass the word that she was a lightweight showboat.Onbalance, though, this is a moving and challenging movie, fascinated by themurky depths that separate what people want from what they say they want andwhat they think they should want.
