Terry McMillan's Waiting to Exhale mesmerized its readers withvivid descriptions of what a black woman wants in her man, and how hard it isto find it. Women loved it; men were not so thrilled. A friend of minesuggested that the male version of Waiting to Exhale would be much shorter:"What I'm looking for in a woman is someone who's great in bed, and thenturns into a six-pack and a pizza." That is, of course, exactly theproblem: The women in Waiting to Exhale are tired of being treated asdisposable commodities by men who will tell them anything before sex and havenothing to say afterward. Asthe movie version opens, broadcast executive Savannah (Whitney Houston) isdriving from Denver, where there are apparently no men worth having, toPhoenix, where she hopes there are. Soon she's playing hostess in her new hometo a married man who has been saying for years he's about to leave his wife.Also in Phoenix are her three good girlfriends: Bernadine (Angela Bassett),whose husband is about to leave her for his white secretary; Gloria (LorettaDevine), who has centered her life around her son, putting on pounds in themeantime, and Robin (Lela Rochon), successful in business but not in love.Duringthe course of "Waiting to Exhale," all of these women will eitherfind what they're looking for, or learn to look for something better. Andthey'll do it with dialogue, wardrobes and settings that owe a lot to soapopera: These are not real women so much as fictional creations carefullydesigned to embody dreams and desires. Many of the women in the audience wouldbe happy to be like any of these women, man or no man.Thecast listing includes a lot of men, who pop up and disappear like ducks in ashooting gallery. Savannah may always have Kenneth (Dennis Haysbert) in herlife; he flies in several times a year, telling suave lies to his wife on acellular phone while promising Savannah that a divorce is imminent.Bernadinehas worked for years in her husband's business, only to have him leave her forhis secretary, "the only woman I've ever loved." Bernadine goesballistic, throwing his clothes into his car and setting it on fire.("Would it be better if she were black?" her husband asks. "No -it would be better if you were black!") Later in the film, in a touchingsequence, she finds a soul mate in a man whose wife is dying; the actor, who isnot billed in the credits, will be a pleasant surprise.Gloriais still a fine-looking woman, despite her extra pounds, but has centered herlife on her son, Tarik (Donald Adeosun Faison), ever since her divorce. Nowshe's in a state of quiet panic as he prepares to leave for a year in Europe.Then a single man (Gregory Hines) moves in across the street, and likes "alittle meat on a woman," and furthermore is a homebody and handyman.(Hines is never seen without a screwdriver or a broken chair; why is it thateverything in a handyman's house needs fixing?) Robin is successful inbusiness, but maybe that intimidates men; the movie has a sad-funny sex scenein which the chubby Michael (Wendell Pierce) makes love badly ("Say myname! Say my name!"), but then turns into an expert at pillow talk. Thenthere's Troy (Mykelti Williamson), whom the other girlfriends can see through,although Robin tries to kid herself he's not a cocaine addict with no money anda habit of stealing anything not nailed down. And there is also Russell (Leon),the handsome guy she's addicted to even though she knows better.Allof these women and all of their stories have been assembled into a screenplayby McMillan and Ron Bass. He also wrote "The Joy Luck Club," anotherfilm that interlocked the stories of four women, but if that one was highdrama, this film is middlebrow, in which the women face not war, famine andfiring squads, but cheaters, liars, dopers and guys who look fine but turn outto be gay.Thisis a debut directing job by Forest Whitaker, and somehow the tone of the filmresembles his own acting: measured, serene, confident. I am not sure that isalways the right tone, however. There are times when the material needs moresharpness, harder edges and bitter satire instead of bemused observation."Waitingto Exhale" is not really an assault on black men (and men in general), butan escapist fantasy that women in the audience can enjoy by musing, "Iwish I had her problems" - and her car, house, wardrobe, figure and men,even wrong men.Onthat level, of soap opera and sociological melodrama, however, the movie doeswork. I was never bored. Occasionally one of the actresses broke out of themold, as when Bassett coolly dealt with the firemen after torching herhusband's car, and I got a glimpse of the energies that could be unleashed inthis material. But for the most part, the movie's content to be anentertainment with a women's magazine angle; its patron saint could be MaeWest, who wanted more men in her life, and more life in her men.
