The comedian Pauly Shore and I would find ourselves in agreementon one thing: The characters he plays are obnoxious. We part company, alas, onwhether they are funny. I say they are not. Andafter "Encino Man," "Son-In-Law" and now "JuryDuty," I am pretty much at the end of my curiosity about furtherexperiments."JuryDuty" is another entry in the national Dumbing It Down sweepstakes, givingus a character who likes jury duty because, hey, when you're sequestered, theroom and board are free. After Jim Carrey in "Ace Ventura: PetDetective" and "Dumb and Dumber," after Adam Sandler in"Billy Madison," after Chris Farley in "Tommy Boy," here isanother character whose appeal rests on rudeness, stupidity and the ability tomake loud bathroom noises.Inthis business one becomes a connoisseur. I can now see that Carrey is avirtuoso, Farley is at least hard-working, Sandler is hopeless and Pauly Shorebypasses all categories to achieve a kind of transcendent fingernails-on-the-blackboardeffect. His appeal must be limited to people whose self-esteem and socialskills are so damaged that they find humor, or at least relief, in at lastencountering a movie character less successful than themselves.Themovie's plot shows us Shore as an unemployed layabout whose mother (Shelley Winters)coddles him. She's glad he didn't get a job as a milkman, because she hears thejob is dangerous. His macho father (Charles Napier) takes another tack,announcing that the free lunch is over until Pauly gets a job. That's why thesummons to jury duty is so welcome: Hey, it's food and shelter.Shore'spurpose in life becomes simple: He needs to prolong the murder trial of the"Drive-Thru Killer" as long as possible. His strategy seems curious,since (as all students of the Simpson trial know by now) almost everything hedoes in the movie would get him thrown off every jury in the country. Nomatter. He is obnoxious to his fellow jurors, makes unwanted advances on abeautiful jury member (Tia Carrera), and muscles into the judge's sidebarconferences.Thescreenplay, by Neil Tolkin, Barbara Williams and Samantha Adams, has some goodlines, of which my favorite is, "Oh, to be young and on Death Row!"There are also many uses of anatomical terms, the usual toilet jokes, andridicule of tabloid TV types who are, and I quote, "bottom-feeders whosuckle on the juice of human tragedy." I'm not sure the makers of thisfilm should include themselves out.
