“The Big Squeeze” opens with a scene involving what I have cometo think of as a Teeny Prole: an actor who looks like a handsome teenage model,playing a character who is allegedly a hardened proletarian. Peter Dobson playsBenny, a con man who is thrown out of a railroad boxcar after cheating in apoker game. Uh, huh. That's how lots of GenXers spend their time. He rolls down an embankment and into a story that feels like a1930s screwball comedy, but is set in the present day and, even moreincredibly, doesn't seem to know it's a comedy. It plays its contrived storyperfectly straight, as if events like this could happen.Bennythe con man walks into a bar and meets the two bartenders, Tanya (Lara FlynnBoyle) and Cece (Teresa Dispina). He follows Tanya home, gives her a “diamond”necklace, and then returns to try to pick up Cece. Soon he's in on a promisingscam. Tanya, who spots him as a grifter, enlists him to get money out of herhusband, Henry (Luca Bercovici). He's a former baseball player who has beenpaid $130,000 in an injury settlement, and has tried to keep the money a secretfrom Tanya, who has supported him for years.Benny'sscheme: He discovers that Henry is a devout Catholic, and that the localmission desperately needs $130,000 to complete earthquake repairs. He enliststhe help of Jesse (Danny Nucci), a gardener whom Tanya has moved in with afterleaving her husband. They will fake a miracle involving a fast-growing tree.That will inspire Henry to give the money to the mission. They will interceptthe money and split it three ways. And, oh yes, there's lots more, includingwhat happens when true believers think it's a real miracle.Iwatched this movie with mounting incredulity. The plot is so ungainly that thecharacters spend a good deal of time just explaining it to one another. Likethe miracle tree, it grows and grows. There is a certain naivete in the filmthat is beguiling: All of the characters act like unworldly innocents, despitethe seamy milieu they inhabit. And they do things like meeting in Union Stationfor no better reason than that it's an attractive location.Dobson,as the con man Benny, has a role and screen presence that reminded me of JohnCusack in “The Grifters.” But that movie explained why a young man would findhimself in a world of crime and deception. “The Big Squeeze” wants us tobelieve the baby-faced Dobson in a role that essentially requires someone likeHarry Dean Stanton or Harvey Keitel--someone rough and worn, battered andexperienced. Not that different casting would have saved the plot.LaraFlynn Boyle has a hapless assignment, too. She's good as an icy brunet, butwrong here--where some scenes are too real for the material (as when herhusband strikes her), and others are pure fabrication. She is required at onepoint to fall in love with Jesse, the gardener, and as I was watching theirlove scenes I could visualize the pages of the script turning, one by one, tooslowly: The only reason these characters are in bed with each other, I thought,is because the screenwriter thought he was obligated to put them there.“TheBig Squeeze” is a movie without purpose, conviction or reward. I can'tunderstand why anyone would want to tell this story--why they liked it, whythey thought it would work, why anyone considered it commercial (it's prettyclear the movie was not made for artistic motives). The actors are wrong forthe characters, the story is lugubrious, and when I discovered that the movie'soriginal title was “The Body of a Woman,” somehow I wasn't surprised: It makessense that this material would have started out attached to a title that hadnothing to do with it.
