"Tommy Boy" is one of those movies that plays like anexplosion down at the screenplay factory. You can almost picture a bewilderedoffice boy, his face smudged with soot, wandering through the ruins andrescuing pages at random. Too bad they didn't mail them to the insurancecompany instead of filming them. Themovie is an assembly of clichés and obligatory scenes from dozens of othermovies, all are better. It has only one original idea, and that's a bad one:The inspiration of making the hero's sidekick into, simultaneously, his buddy,his critic and his rival.It'slike the part was written by three writers locked in separate rooms."TommyBoy" stars Chris Farley of "Saturday Night Live," the guy withthe size 23 neck, as Tommy Callahan, the dopey son of a Sandusky brake shoemanufacturer. His father, Big Tom (Brian Dennehy), is proud of him even thoughhe squeaked through college in seven years, and supplies him with an office andbig responsibilities when he comes back to Ohio. Meanwhile, there are startlingdevelopments on the domestic front, where Big Tom, a widower, is engaged tomarry the bodacious Beverly (Bo Derek).YoungTommy is overjoyed, because Beverly has a son, Paul (Rob Lowe), which meansTommy at last will have the brother he always dreamed of. Paul doubts there'smuch to do in Sandusky, but Tommy proves him wrong, introducing him to thefavorite local pastime, "cow tipping," which means sneaking up onsleeping cows and tipping them over. In other hands this could have been themovie's only funny scene, but director Peter Segal doesn't have a clue aboutcomic payoffs and bungles it before ending with the desperate director'sancient standby, as the lads fall in the mud.Theplot thickens. Or does it congeal? I began ticking off the story clichés: We'dalready had (1) dumb son returns to family business and (2) unexpectedstepmother. Soon we get (3) company gets in trouble and all workers will losejobs, (4) it's up to the kid to save the day, (5) evil stepmother, (6) roadmovie and (7) buddy picture. The last two come as Tommy hits the road in adesperate last-minute bid to sell brake shoes, accompanied by his friendRichard (David Spade, also from "Saturday Night Live"). Richard hasbeen introduced as a resentful employee who doesn't think Tommy should get sucha quick promotion. Now he becomes a sidekick, critic, rival and buddy, allwrapped in one ungainly package.Themovie tries for laughs during the road trip, I'm afraid, by having Richard'scar fall to pieces. First a deer destroys the convertible roof. Then a doorcomes loose. Then the hood flies off.Theydrive down the highway in what's left. Those whose memories stretch all the wayback . . . back . . . back to the dim past of 1987 will remember a similardemolished car in "Planes, Trains and Automobiles," one of the manybetter movies this one rips off.Noone is funny in "Tommy Boy." There are no memorable lines. None ofthe characters is interesting except for the enigmatic figure played by RobLowe, who seems to have wandered over from "Hamlet." Judging by theevidence on the screen, the movie got a green light before a usable screenplayhad been prepared, with everybody reassuring each other that since they weresuch funny people, inspiration would overcome them. It was Forrest Gump, I believe,who said, "Funny is as funny does."
