The film, directed by Jim Jarmusch, follows a 1996 concert tourand intercuts footage from 1986 and 1976 tours. It's all shot in muddy earthtones, on grainy Super 8 film, Hi Fi 8 video and 16-mm. If you seek the originof the grunge look, seek no further: Young, in his floppy plaid shirts andbaggy shorts, looks like a shipwrecked lumberjack. His fellow band members,Billy Talbot, Poncho Sampedro and Ralph Molina, exude vibes that would striketerror into the heart of an unarmed convenience store clerk. This is not a fly-on-the-wall documentary. Jarmusch's interviewstake place in a laundry room, where the band members and Young's father sit ona straight chair and meditate on the band's long and lonely road. Young museson “the trail of destruction I've left behind me,” and there is solemn mentionof departed band members (“Neil once said they were dropping like flies”).These seances are intercut with concert footage, during whichthe band typically sings the lyrics through once and then gets mired in endlessloops of instrumental repetition that seem positioned somewhere between mantrasand autism. The music is shapeless, graceless and built from rhythm, notmelody; it is amusing, given the undisciplined sound, to eavesdrop later asthey argue in a van about whether they all were following the same arrangement.The older footage is not illuminating. One high point, from avisit to Glasgow in 1976, is a meal in a restaurant that is interrupted whenthe fabric flowers in the centerpiece catch fire. The band members trysmothering the flames with napkins and extinguishing them with orange juice,and eventually they join the woman who owns the place in sadly eyeing theashes.Later in the film, Jarmusch himself appears on camera, readingto Young from the Old Testament, a book the musician seems unfamiliar with.Jarmusch reads the parts where an angry God tells his people how he will punishthem, and Young looks as if God's tribulations are nothing he hasn't beenthrough more than once.If there is a theme to the band's musings, it is astonishmentthat they have been playing together for so long. They play with other groups,but when they come together, they say, there is a fusion. With touchingself-effacement, Young tells Jarmusch, “The band is called `Neil Young andCrazy Horse,' but I know it's really `Crazy Horse.' My new jacket says `CrazyHorse.' The others say `Neil Young and Crazy Horse,' but mine just says `CrazyHorse.' “ Yes, but wouldn't the point come across a little better if theirsjust said “Crazy Horse,” too?
