Anyone who has ever painted or drawn knows the experience ofdropping out of the world of words and time. A state of reverie takes over;there is no sensation of the passing of hours. The voice inside our head thatallows us to talk to ourselves falls silent, and there is only color, form,texture and the way things flow together. Thereis a theory to explain this. Language is centered on the left side of thebrain. Art lives on the right side. You can't draw a thing as long as you'rethinking about it in words. That's why artists are inarticulate about theirwork, and why it is naive to ask them, “What were you thinking about when youdid this?” They have given it less thought than you have.Jean-MichelBasquiat seems to have spent most of his brief life on the right side of thebrain. Only another artist could understand that, and “Basquiat” is theconfident, poetic filmmaking debut of the painter Julian Schnabel, who was afriend of Basquiat's. As Schnabel remembers him, he is a quiet, almost wordlesspresence, a young man who rarely says what he is thinking and oftendeliberately chooses to miss the point of a conversation. He is dreamy, sweet, andpensive. There are deep hurts and angers, but he often chooses to turn apassive mask to the world.Basquiat,born in New York to middle-class parents, was an important artist in thegeneration that exhibited in Manhattan's SoHo district around 1980. Hisanonymous work was known earlier: He was a graffiti artist whose neatly printedlegends, signed “SAMO,” were found all over New York. On April 29, 1979, at aparty opening the Canal Zone (a New York art space), Basquiat identifiedhimself as SAMO, and within a short time his paintings were finding collectors.Hiswork seemed to accumulate on the surfaces he found around him. He painted onboards, walls, canvases, on the dress of his girlfriend, and even on herpaintings. His work assembles areas of bold color with more detailed areas oftext, figures, designs and scribbles--blueprints for a world in his mind. Hefell into success with astonishing ease. His first sales came after heapproached Andy Warhol and a famous collector (played by Dennis Hopper) at arestaurant table, and they bought his decorated postcards.Basquiat(Jeffrey Wright, who gives a performance of almost mystical opacity) was atthat time only a few months out of homelessness; he had lived for a time in acardboard box. He drifted away from his middle-class home and into a world of hisown, and even to his girlfriend Gina (Claire Forlani) he remained an enigma.His attention was inward; like all drug users, he focused much of the time onthe way he felt, or didn't feel.TheNew York art world quickly makes Basquiat a star. His work is good (when yousee it in the movie, you can feel why people liked it so much), but his storyis better: from a cardboard box to a gallery opening! A dealer named ReneRicard (Michael Wincott) spots his work at a party, delivers the ancient pitch “Iwill make you a star,” and does. “You're named SAMO? Sounds famous already. Yougot a real name?” When he learns that Basquiat also performs in a band, hefrets, “Are you Tony Bennett? Do you sing onstage and paint in your spare time?”Basquiat soon becomes a close friend of Andy Warhol's, who in a remarkableperformance by David Bowie comes across as preternaturally detached (that's notnews) but also as gentle, open, accepting, and instinctively perceptive aboutnew directions in art. When Basquiat is depressed by a magazine articledepicting him as Warhol's “mascot,” a mutual friend tells him, “Andy has neverasked me for a thing except to talk to you about getting off drugs.” ThatBasquiat will not do. Drugs are the center of his existence. His best friendfrom the early days, a Puerto Rican painter named Benny (Benicio Del Toro),finally drops him because of his self-destructiveness. Gina finds him nearlydead after an overdose. It is clear to everyone he is in trouble. But by nowBasquiat is in a mental land of his own. We learn that his mother is a mentalpatient, and there is a poignant late scene as he tries to break into theshuttered convent where she once lived; turned away from the chained gates, hewanders the streets in pajamas, headed for homelessness again.Schnabelknows the New York art scene intimately (his own paintings appear in the movieas the work of a character played by Gary Oldham), and he shows us the agents,the critics, the collectors and the dealers (Parker Posey plays Basquiat'sdealer Mary Boone). He knows the acquisitive greed of collectors and dealers,and shows Basquiat drawing in plum sauce in the guest book at Mr. Chow's andanother guest at the table tearing the page from the book (is it framed onsomebody's wall even now?).Schnabelalso has a good ear for the lingo. Racism is not racism, apparently, if it isexpressed with the right tone of bored sophistication, and so we hearBasquiat's admirers saying, “This ... is the real voice of the gutter!” Atanother point he is described as “the pickaninny of the art world.” He hears, “Therehas never been a black painter who was considered important.” Actually he is awonderful painter, and the right side of his brain is rarely wrong, as hedemonstrates in a remarkable scene with Warhol where he fearlessly takes abrush and applies a large white area to one of Warhol's Mobil flying horses.Warhol lets him: “I think you may be right about the white.” But there isalways madness there. Schnabel remembers that Basquiat often talked aboutmoving to Hawaii, and shows waves and surfers in the sky above Manhattan. Heshows Basquiat painting a stack of car tires, and then seeing them transformedinto a flowering tree. At the end, he was wearing boat like wooden shoes onwhich he had painted “Titanic.” He died Aug. 12, 1988. He was 28 years old.
