The very last shot in "Boys on the Side" is of anempty room. As the camera pans around it, we remember who was in it, and howmuch we grew to care about them. We may be a little surprised by how thathappened, because the movie starts out seeming contrived and routine, and onlygradually gathers power until, by the end, it is completely involving. Theopening is a Meet Cute. A singer named Jane (Whoopi Goldberg) gets fired fromher job in a crummy New York club, and decides to head west in search of herdestiny. She answers an ad from a woman named Robin (Mary-Louise Parker) whohas a car and is looking for someone to share the driving.Robinis, Jane decides, "the whitest human in America." How white? She oncesang "Close to You" in a talent contest, and "The Way WeWere" is her favorite film. But Jane needs the ride, and so they team upand hit the road, and so far nothing of great interest has happened, and we'reanticipating this will be another one of those Goldberg roles where she giveswhite folks lessons in black appreciation.Thefirst glimmer of strangeness comes in Pittsburgh, where they stop off to visitJane's friend Holly (Drew Barrymore). Holly's boyfriend Nick (Billy Wirth) is atextbook example of a drugged-out paranoid who ministers to his own inadequacyby beating on his woman.TheGoldberg character waltzes in between them, but suddenly it is quiet Robin, aformer Realtor, who commands the room - approaching the domestic violence as ifit were a house closing. Jane, Holly and even the drug-dealing loser fallsilent in amazement as she somehow brokers them into a truce.Itdoesn't quite last - Holly has to get Nick's attention with a baseball bat andthen tape him to a chair before they can escape - but soon the three women arein the same car, heading west, and we realize this is not going to be a sitcom,a buddy movie or a road movie but a story that develops on its own unexpectedterms. The director is Herbert Ross ("Steel Magnolias") and thewriter is Don Roos ("Single White Female"), and with the actressesthey create three true originals.Thereare elements of the plot that are shamelessly contrived - including the wholesetup explaining why they think they need to go on the lam. But we don't care,because by then the movie has entered so deeply into these three lives thatwhat really matters is only what they think about one another.Itis clear from the first scene or two that the Goldberg character is a lesbian.Less clear is whether the Parker character knows that, or how she feels aboutit. Parker, too, has a secret, which will not be revealed here. And thecatalyst in the group is the Drew Barrymore character, filled with crazyenergy, high spirits and deep broodings.Thosewho know Barrymore from her adolescent headlines in the supermarket trash pressmay not realize that in movies like "Guncrazy" (1992), she has beendeveloping into an actress of great natural zest and conviction. The difficultemotional scenes in "Boys on the Side" belong to Goldberg and Parker,but it is Barrymore whose spirit somehow draws them together into a family. Andthe movie gets a lot of comedy out of the Barrymore character's tempestuouslove affair with a Tucson cop named Abraham Lincoln (Matthew McConaughey), whois an absolute straight arrow, and at one point does the most incredible thingand then explains, "I take this name seriously! I cannot tell a lie."The others groan: "That was George Washington, schmuck!" As for theother two women, they just get stronger and stronger as the movie goes on.Goldberg so often wastes her time (in movies like "Sister Act 2: Back In The Habit")that her work here is a reminder of such great past roles as "The ColorPurple" and "The Long Walk Home." It is an exercise inrestraint: She is wise, grown up and calm.Shenever reaches for an effect, never goes for a laugh that isn't right there inher hand, and deals with her character's lesbianism in a way that can perhapsbe called good manners: Yes, she is gay, but she doesn't believe in imposingher choice on others, and it is only gradually that we realize what thestillness of her heart can contain. She can also be very funny. Her take onsome lesbians: "They're very emotional, they love uniforms, and don'tbreak their hearts. Especially UPS uniforms." The Parker character is aseries of revelations, some sad, some delightful; the way she handles theviolent Nick is one of the bravura scenes in recent movies, and we get theimpression the other actors want to applaud as much as the audience does.Later, she has a couple of big emotional scenes that are played on exactly theright notes. Look, for example, at the way she sees a piano that is a gift, andbites her lower lip. A tiny gesture, but the right one.Thereviews for "Boys on the Side" will mention "Fried GreenTomatoes" and "Thelma and Louise," because it shares theirassorted themes: female bonding, unexpressed love, women on the run. But thismovie is not a collection of parts from other films. It's an original, and whatit does best is show how strangers can become friends, and friends can becomelike family.Toget to know someone is very difficult, but if you really do, they should beable to tell you almost anything, and ask you almost anything, and that iswhere "Boys on the Side" is leading us.Bythe end, it has prepared its ground so completely that the final powerfulscenes can be played very quietly. Some people sing a song. A room is empty,and the camera remembers who was in it. And we miss them.
