Eyewitnesses are notoriously unreliable, even when they want totell the truth. As an Army lieutenant colonel reconstructs a battle scene in “CourageUnder Fire,” he begins to suspect that some of his witnesses are lying. Hisassignment: decide on the suitability of the first woman ever nominated for aMedal of Honor. His problem: The White House is salivating over the media imageof presenting the posthumous medal to the woman's young daughter, in a ceremonyin the Rose Garden. The colonel, named Serling and played by Denzel Washington, isdetermined to do his job honestly and well, even though his own life is fallingapart. During a night tank battle in the Gulf War, he was indirectlyresponsible for taking out an American tank with friendly fire. An Armyinvestigation excused him, but now his sleep is fragmented by nightmares, he'sdrinking too much, and he has moved out on his wife and children. Theinvestigation is about the only thing holding him together.Thewoman under consideration for the Medal of Honor is Capt. Karen Walden (MegRyan), who commanded a helicopter in the battle zone. After taking out an enemytank by the refreshing improvisation of dropping a fuel tank on it, Walden'schopper was shot down by enemy fire. Nearby American troops heard M-16 fire,apparently by the wounded Walden, that kept the enemy at bay the next morning,until her men could be rescued. For this she certainly deserves the medal--ifthat's how it happened.EdwardZwick and Patrick Sheane Duncan, the director and writer, construct theirscreenplay with a nod to “Rashomon” (1950), Akira Kurosawa's famous film inwhich four defendants give their wildly different testimony about a murder. In “CourageUnder Fire,” the witnesses are Walden's own men. Ilario (Matt Damon), themedic, paints Walden as a brave leader sacrificing her life for her men.Monfriez (Lou Diamond Phillips), the gunner, says, “She was afraid, Colonel.She was a coward. That's the bottom line on your Capt. Walden.” Another crewmember, Altameyer (Seth Gilliam), languishes in a veterans' hospital, confusedby painkillers.Serling,the Denzel Washington character, doggedly conducts his investigation by day andspends his nights boozing in hotel bars. He is being tracked by a reporter forthe Washington Post (Scott Glenn), who suspects there was a cover-up of thetank destroyed by friendly fire. Serling tries to avoid him, but Serling is aman who desperately needs to tell the truth to someone, and the reporter isrelentless.Theseinterlocking investigations all take place under the thumb of the unrelentingGen. Hershberg (Michael Moriarty), who wants the friendly fire incident keptquiet and the Medal of Honor approved (there is urgent pressure from the WhiteHouse). Hershberg turns the screws, threatening Serling's Army promotion pathand hinting at reprisals (“I know about the drinking”).“CourageUnder Fire” is Hollywood's first film about the Gulf War, and one of the rarefilms to deal with women in combat. But it is not simply a war film; there arealso personal issues involved, and the story does a good job of dealing withthe relationship between Serling and his wife (Regina Taylor), who tells himshe will wait for him--but not forever.Washington'srole is the central one, and he handles it well, playing a man who sticks toprocedure and self-discipline even in the midst of emotional chaos (before thetank battle, he leads his men in prayer, and then adds, “Now let's kill 'emall!”). Meg Ryan's role is a different kind of challenge: In the flashbacksthrough the eyes of her men, she is seen in three or four entirely differentstyles of behavior. The movie doesn't give us one Capt. Walden but several, forus (and Serling) to choose among.Zwick'sdirection handles the many conflicting story possibilities with great clarity.And the opening sequence, involving the mistaken tank attack, makes it clear howconfusing battle is, and how differently it will be perceived by eachparticipant. The end of the film understandably lays on the emotion a littleheavily, but until then “Courage Under Fire” has been a fascinating emotionaland logistical puzzle--almost a courtroom movie, with the desert as thecourtroom.
