There's an early scene in "Crimson Tide" when thecharacters are playing a trivia game, remembering the stars of early submarinemovies like "Run Silent, Run Deep." It's clever, showing how the crewmembers of the U.S. nuclear submarine Alabama have formed many of their imagesof the silent service at the movies. It'salso daring: This movie is inviting comparison with the classics, and althoughit doesn't mention "Das Boot" or "The Hunt for RedOctober," it could have: This movie is in the same skillful tradition.Thetradition includes a strong commander, and the Alabama possesses a legend:Capt. Ramsey (Gene Hackman), who trained under the legendary Adm. HymanRickover, father of the nuclear submarine, and is now nearing the end of hisactive duty. Ramsey, known for chewing up subordinates, is also famous for hislittle dog, a Jack Russell terrier that is allowed to lift its little legwherever it pleases.Asthe movie opens, the Alabama gets a new second in command: Lt. Cmdr. Hunter(Denzel Washington). In an early interview with Ramsey, the old-timer strikes avaguely sinister note; Hackman is a master at seeming genial and friendly whilemasking deeper, darker thoughts. The sub sets out to sea, and during adiscussion around the dinner table, Hunter makes the mistake of telling Ramsey,"In my humble opinion, in the nuclear world the true enemy is waritself." These words will haunt him. Ramsey tests the younger man,and when a fire breaks out in thesubmarine's galley, the captain chooses that moment to order an onboard drill.Hunter questions the decision, saying he would have attended to the fire first,before calling a drill. Ramsey says he saw the fire as an opportunity to testthe ability of his men to function under chaotic conditions.And,he adds, while the junior officer is free to disagree, he should never do so infront of the enlisted men: "We're here to preserve democracy, not topractice it." A coded message is received. Russian rebel troops haveseized control of nuclear missile silos, and the Alabama is placed on full waralert. Its job, if it receives a verified command message, will be to fire itsnuclear missiles at the land-based targets in a preemptive strike. Meanwhile,in an exchange of missiles with an enemy sub, the Alabama's radio apparatus istemporarily disabled, but not before a confirmed message has been received thatorders the sub to ready its missiles for firing.Nowdeep silence reigns beneath the ocean. The sub, cut off from its chain ofcommand, may be the only deterrent to a Russian nuclear attack. Should thecaptain seize the initiative and order a launch? He can do that only if hissecond-in-command agrees, and Hunter doesn't. That's the basic set-up in"Crimson Tide," an uncommonly intelligent dramatization about thechoices, dangers and duties of nuclear warfare.Themovie has the usual trappings of submarine adventure pictures: emergencyflooding, near-hits, the danger of sinking below a safe depth. Director TonyScott ("Top Gun") handles these scenes with skill, and yet they'renot at the heart of Michael Schiffer's screenplay. Instead, the movie developsalong ideological lines, as Ramsey and Hunter - both absolutely convincedthey're right - attempt to gain control of the submarine. Is the captain guiltyof a procedural violation, or is his second in command guilty of mutiny? Oddlyenough, "Crimson Tide" develops into an actors' picture, not just anaction movie. There are a lot of special effects, high-tech gadgets and violentstandoffs, yes, but the movie is really a battle between two wills. Hackman andWashington are well-matched, and although my sympathies were with theWashington character (faced with the prospect of a billion deaths, it is bestto err on the side of caution), I could understand the logic of the seniorofficer. Hackman's Ramsey is not a warmonger or a mad dog, but an officer soobsessed with following orders that even an incomplete one has a message, justfor him.Ina large supporting cast, George Dzundza stands out as Cob, the officer who mustside with Hunter or Ramsey, and who places proper procedure higher than hisopinion of either man's position.Hisbest scene comes as he monitors a depth gauge that shows the Alabama sinking tohull-crushing pressures. As it appears inevitable that the sub will bedestroyed, he makes an interesting actor's choice: Instead of allowing hisvoice to grow tense or exciting, he flattens it into a disinterested monotoneof resignation. That works even better to underline the tension.What'sunique about "Crimson Tide" is that it doesn't offer clear-cutchoices between good and evil. Hackman may be violating procedures, but perhapshe has good reasons. Washington, fearing to unleash war, may leave his countryunprotected.Eventhe ending is intriguingly even-handed. This is the rare kind of war movie thatnot only thrills people while they're watching it, but invites them to leavethe theater actually discussing the issues.
