Sometimes a man and woman are drawn together precisely becausethey are perfectly wrong for each other. Consider Pam and Chris Anderson, thesubjects of “Normal Life.” He is a suburban Chicago cop. She is a pot-head whoworks in a factory, drinks too much, and dreams of falling into a black hole sothat her image is forever imprinted on its event horizon. Theymeet in a bar. Pam's with a guy. They have a fight. She smashes a glass andcuts herself. The guy leaves. Chris walks over, helps her bandage the cut, andsays, “Want to dance?” It's awkward dancing with your hand held up in the airso the blood doesn't drip, but she accepts. It's love. They marry.“NormalLife,” loosely based on a real-life crime story from the Chicago suburbs, isthe new movie by John McNaughton, famous for “Henry: Portrait of a SerialKiller.” It's not as unremittingly painful as the earlier film, but just asfascinating in its portrait of criminal pathology. Just as Henry drewaccomplices into the net of his madness, so does Pam (Ashley Judd) mesmerizeChris (Luke Perry). He's a straight-arrow policeman whose hobby is targetpractice. She's a space cadet whose hobby is astronomy and who is reading, orpretending to read, A Brief History of Time.Pamis one of those women who is forever pushing the edges of her own personalevent horizon. She is drunk a lot, hysterical, manic-depressive, and self-destructive.She tears up the apartment, mutilates herself, tries suicide and specializes inembarrassing Chris (she walks into the police station dressed in hot pants andturns up at his father's funeral on in-line skates).Chrisputs up with this because he must. Something in his makeup has addicted himto--what? The excitement? The abuse? The role of rescuer? “I just want to makeyou happy,” he says. After he gets fired, he works a double shift at a securityservice, but she spends faster than he can earn. So he robs a bank. He's goodat robbing banks, and soon he's able to show her the bright new townhouse inLisle that he's bought with the money.Asfor Chris, he gets his dream, too--which is to operate his own used-bookstore.Eventually, of course, she finds out what he's doing--and is so excited by theidea of his crimes, she has a sexual climax for the first time in her life. Shewants to come along on the next job, and although Chris knows in his bones thatit is a big mistake, he lets her. You may vaguely remember the outcome fromheadlines a few years ago.Thisis one of those movies you watch with the same fascination as a developingtraffic accident. Part of its success is due to the casting. Ashley Judd, sowarm and likable in “Ruby in Paradise” (1993), here plays the kind of woman youwould cross the room, or the state, to avoid. Luke Perry, who has a neatcop-style mustache and an obsession with control, is the perfect foil as a manwho has never seen anything like her, and can't stop looking.“NormalLife” takes place against the very normal backdrop of Chicago's westernsuburbs. Pam and Chris eat in fast food places, shop in stores with “BUY MORE!”painted on the walls, rob drive-up banks, and when they fight, they do it whilestalking down the deserted sidewalks of a mall in the middle of the night. Theylook, at first glance, like your typical young married couple. But on the basisof this film, my guess is that after their crime spree ended and the press cameto interview their neighbors, nobody said, “Gee, they were always so quiet andnice.” McNaughton seems fascinated by the ways in which lawlessness isinfectious. In both “Henry” and “Normal Life,” there are characters who wouldnever commit a crime on their own. But once they fall under the spell of areckless or heedless outlaw, they are helpless to resist. The lesson, I guess,is that if you see someone in a bar cut themselves while breaking up with theirlast lover, let them bleed.Note:“Normal Life” got caught in a quarrel between its studio, Fine Line, andMcNaughton. The studio decided not to release the film theatrically, and airedit on Home Box Office not long ago. Now, after McNaughton's protests, it isbeing given a limited chance to prove itself in Chicago and a few othermarkets.
