She had been forced into prudence in her youth, she learnedromance as she grew older. - Jane Austen, Persuasion The novels of Jane Austen are filled with conversation - withchatter, gossip, speculation and homily. But in Persuasion, the centralcharacter scarcely speaks during some of the most important scenes. AnneElliot, having arrived at the advanced age of 27 still a spinster, is more orless denied a role in the rigid social hierarchy of her time. She is the mostintelligent of women, and the only one in her family with common sense, but inher circle, marriage conveys a license to talk in society, and she has not thelicense.Anne (Amanda Root) is almost severe. Her face is often drawn upinto serious expressions, as if she is meditating on the stupidity of thosearound her, and the likelihood that she will have to spend the rest of her lifeattending to them. Once, eight years ago, she was in love. But the man,Frederick Wentworth, was a naval officer with no fortune. Faced with such adilemma, a girl turns to her mother, but Anne's mother was dead and her fathera fool, so she heeded Lady Russell, a neighbor, who advised her that such a manwas not the right match.Nowthere has been no match at all, and Anne sits patiently at tea. Her father andolder sister have lived so extravagantly that they will be forced to rent thefamily house. They will have to "retrench," says Sir Walter Elliot(Corin Redgrave), with a bitter taste in his mouth. The house will be let toAdmiral Croft. The admiral comes to call, bringing with him his wife's brother- who is, of course, Frederick Wentworth, now grown wealthy. So discreet wasAnne's relationship with him, so subdued their courtship, so quiet hisproposal, so confidential her rejection, that the others fail to notice thather heart skips a beat when he enters the room.Wentworth(Ciaran Hinds) is as quiet as Anne, by choice. He does not mix easily indrawing rooms, and is happier on the bridge of his ship, from which (althoughthe Royal Navy permits captains to bring along their wives) women are banned,along with their chatter.Heis the sort of man who stands stiffly in a corner, wishing desperately to be atsea.Thereare so many talkative characters in "Persuasion" that unless you haveread the novel, it may take you some time to realize that the story is aboutAnne and Frederick. After the breakup of the household, Anne goes to visit hermarried sister Mary (Sophie Thompson), whose convalescence has not curtailedher appetite.Thenthere is an excursion to Lyme Regis, in the company of Frederick and otherfriends and relatives. The group visits Wentworth's old friend, who isheartbroken after the death of the woman he loves, and Anne speaks tenderly andsensibly with him, while Wentworth observes. During all of this time, there hasscarcely been a meaningful word between Frederick and Anne; each thinks theother is, in one way or another, engaged.Weknow what we want to happen - what must happen, given the conventions of thetime and the inclinations of Jane Austen. We know they must be married andredress the great wrong of eight years before. But everything conspires toprevent that. Anne's silly cousin William (Samuel West) also seems to be asuitor for her hand - and to Frederick, not easy in the ways of romance, itseems of course that he must win it. One of the best scenes in the movie takesplace in a tea shop in Bath, where Anne and Frederick at last meet, by chance,and it appears he will have his chance to walk her home, before Williamappears, and Frederick withdraws without a fight."Persuasion"has been directed by Roger Michell not so much like a "MasterpieceTheater" production, which is what we might have expected, as like amatter-of-fact record of the events under study.Inthat he reflects Austen's tone. The details are right (in particular, we noticehow dark the houses are), but this is not a costume piece; it is a film abouttwo people who are shy and proud, and about a process of mutual persuasion thattakes place between them almost without a word being spoken on the realsubject.Everythingdepends on Amanda Root and Ciaran Hinds in the key roles, and they are wellcast as people who might not be everybody's idea of perfection, but are eachother's. All of society seems arrayed against them - not through prejudice, notthrough ill-will, but through inhibition and hateful ground rules that prohibitthem from speaking easily about the only subject that interests them, theirfuture together. Much of the movie's emotional work has to be done by theirfaces and eyes, while other people speak of other things, and to see thathappening is frustrating, because ithappens so slowly, and romantic, because it happens at all.
