“Sling Blade” begins with a remarkable monologue deliveredstraight to the camera. A man with a raspy voice, an overshot jaw and a lot ofpain in his eyes says he reckons we might like to hear about his story, and sohe tells it. His name is Karl Childers, he is retarded, and he has been in astate facility since childhood, when he found his mother with her lover andkilled them both. But now, he says, “I reckon I got no reason to kill no one.Uh, huh.” Karl is talking to a reporter about his release from the institution.They reckon he has been cured. They are probably right. He is not a killer,would not kill without good and proper reason, and now understands how, as achild, he misinterpreted the situation. As he talks, we are struck by hisforceful presence; he is retarded, yes, but he is complex and observant, andhas spent a lot of time thinking about what he should and shouldn't do. If“Forrest Gump” had been written by William Faulkner, the result might have beensomething like “Sling Blade.” The movie is a work of great originality andfascination by Billy Bob Thornton, who wrote it, directed it and plays KarlChilders. He says that the character “came to him” one morning while he wasshaving, and he started talking to himself in the mirror, in Karl's voice.Thorntonis a former country musician turned screenwriter (he wrote the remarkable “OneFalse Move” and “A Family Thing”). He plays Karl as a man of limitedintelligence but great seriousness, who reasons as well as he can, and feelsdeeply. There is pain, humor, irony and sweetness in the character, and a voiceand manner so distinctive, he is the most memorable movie character I've seenin a long time. Uh, huh. And the way the story of his freedom unfolds has aterrible fascination: We can guess where events might be leading, and we cansee how they cannot be changed.Onhis release from prison, Karl is more or less at loose ends. He can fix mostanything and gets a job as a garage mechanic. He encounters and befriends ayoung boy named Frank (Lucas Black), and senses immediately that the boy has awounded spirit. He meets the boy's mother, Linda (Natalie Canerday), who has agood heart and offers to let Karl live with them, in quarters in the garage.Karl soon understands the wounded look in Frank's eyes, because he meetsLinda's boyfriend Doyle (country singer Dwight Yoakam), who likes to lounge inthe living room, drinking one longneck beer after another and ruling the roostwith loud, boorish opinions. His criticisms of the boy are especially cruel.Karlwatches, and listens, and thinks. There is another key character in the story:Linda's boss, Vaughan (John Ritter), a homosexual who accepts his sexuality butseems sort of apologetic about it, and who is also Linda's best friend. It'shard to understand why Linda stays with the venomous Doyle; maybe it's aversion of battered-wife syndrome, and she can't imagine leaving. Only Vaughanand her son make life bearable.Karlsettles into the household and begins to savor the taste of freedom. He is nottoo sure how some aspects of the world work, and stands in front of a door forhours before he thinks of knocking. He repairs everything he puts his hand to,he makes new friends, and in one superb adventure, he orders and eats frenchfries for the first time, and his delight, masked behind his usual gruffmanner, is boundless. (“I reckon I'd like me some of them french fries, uh,huh.”) These characters are brought to life with a vivid strength. We seeLinda's life from the outside, through Karl's eyes, which view it in a veryliteral way and try to make sense of it. And we see it from the inside, throughthe eyes of Vaughan, the homosexual, who like Karl is only a witness, but feelsthe pain. One of the movie's many pleasures is Ritter's performance as Vaughan;the character has a complexity and sensitivity that seem to have come right outof his small-town time and place.Themovie's ultimate destination is not hard to guess, but we feel a certainsatisfaction when it arrives there. And by then we have come to know Karl witha real understanding and fondness. He is a character unlike any other in themovies, an original, and in creating him, Thornton has made a place for himselfamong the best new filmmakers. As an actor, he creates a difficult characterand finds exactly the right way to play him. If there were the slightestjustice and curiosity in the Academy Award process, Thornton's work here wouldget a nomination.
