"This kind of certainty comes but once in a lifetime." --Robert to FrancescaClintEastwood's "The Bridges of Madison County" is not about love and notabout sex, but about an idea. The film opens with the information that twopeople once met and fell in love, but decided not to spend the rest of theirlives together. The implication is: If they had acted on their desire, theywould not have deserved such a love.Almosteverybody knows the story by now. Robert James Waller's novel has been a hugebest-seller. Its prose is not distinguished, but its story is compelling: Heprovides the fantasy of total eroticism within perfect virtue, elevating to aspiritual level the common fantasy in which a virile stranger materializes inthe kitchen of a quiet housewife and takes her into his arms.Waller'sgift is to make the housewife feel virtuous afterward.Itis easy to analyze the mechanism, but more difficult to explain why this filmis so deeply moving -- why Clint Eastwood and Meryl Streep have made it into awonderful movie love story, playing Robert and Francesca. We know, of course,that they will meet, fall in love and part forever. It is necessary that theypart. If the story had ended "happily" with them running awaytogether, no one would have read Waller's book and no movie would exist. Theemotional peak of the movie is the renunciation, when Francesca does not openthe door of her husband's truck and run to Robert. This moment, and not themoment when the characters first kiss, or make love, is the film's passionateclimax.WhenEastwood announced that he had bought the novel and planned to direct and starin the movie, eyebrows were raised.Readershad already cast it in their minds, and not with Eastwood -- or with MerylStreep, for that matter. There is still a tendency to identify Eastwood withhis cowboy and cop roles, and to forget that in recent years he has grown intoone of the most creative forces in Hollywood, both as an actor and a director.He was taking a chance by casting himself as Robert Kincaid, but it pays off ina performance that is quiet, gentle and yet very masculine.AndStreep wonderfully embodies Francesca Johnson, the Italian woman who findsherself with a husband and children, living on a farm in the middle of a flatIowa horizon. The two of them construct their performances not out of grandgestures, but out of countless subtle little moments of growing love; a timecomes when they are solemn in the presence of the joy that has come to them.Kincaidis a photographer for National Geographic, shooting a story on the coveredbridges of the county. Francesca's husband and children have left home forseveral days to go to the Illinois State Fair. Photographer and housewife meet,and an awkward but friendly conversation leads to an offer of iced tea; thenshe shyly asks him to stay for dinner.Oneof the story's mysteries is just when each of them becomes erotically aware ofthe other, and there is a moment, when he goes out to get beer from the car,and she pauses while preparing salad, when she not quite smiles to herself. Sheseems happy; there is a lift in her heart. In another scene, she answers thetelephone and, standing behind him, adjusts his collar, brushes his neck withher finger, and then leaves her hand resting on his shoulder. Very quietly.Eastwoodand his cinematographer, Jack N. Green, find a wonderful play of light, shadowand candlelight in the key scenes across the kitchen table, with jazz and bluesplaying softly on a radio. They understand that Richard and Francesca are notfalling in love with each other, exactly -- that takes time, when you aremiddle-aged -- but with the idea of their love, with what Richard calls"certainty." One of the sources of the movie's poignancy is that theflowering of the love will be forever deferred; they will know they are rightfor each other, and not follow up on their knowledge.Robertwants her to leave with him. The notion is enormously attractive to her. Lifeon the farm is "not what I dreamed of when I was a girl." She envieshis life of travel. Not understanding quite how tied she is to the land, hesuggests her husband could take her "on a safari." Her smile showswhat a wild idea that is. "What's he like?" Robert asks. "He'svery clean," she replies. "Hard-working . . . gentle . . . a goodfather."Andhe is. The story never makes the mistake of portraying Richard Johnson as a badhusband. But we have seen, in an early scene, that there is no conversationaround the Johnson family dinner table. With Robert Kincaid, there is muchconversation; they talk of their ideals, and she says, "But how can youlive for just what you want?" And, quietly, "We are the choices thatwe have made, Robert." And they talk on, quoting Yeats, smoking Camels,dancing to the radio.Allof the scenes involving Eastwood and Streep find the right notes and shadings.The surrounding story -- involving Francesca's adult son and daughter findingher diaries and reading her story after her death -- is not as successful. Iknow this framing mechanism, added by writer Richard LaGravenese, is necessary;thewhole emotional tone of theromance depends on it belonging to the lost past. And yet Annie Corley andVictor Slezak, as Caroline and Michael, never seem quite real, and Michael'sshock at his mother's behavior, in particular, seems forced, like a storydevice. The payoff at the end -- as they reassess their own lives -- seemsperfunctory.Butthe central story glows. I've seen the movie twice now and was even moreinvolved the second time, because I was able to pay more attention to thenuances of voice and gesture. Such a story could so easily be vulgarized, couldbe reduced to obvious elements of seduction, sex and melodramatic parting.Streep and Eastwood weave a spell, and it is based on that particular knowledgeof love and self that comes with middle age. Younger characters might have runoff together. Older ones might not have dared to declare themselves."TheBridges of Madison County" is about two people who find the promise ofperfect personal happiness, and understand, with sadness and acceptance, thatthe most important things in life are not always about making yourself happy.
