The movie is also smashingly entertaining on the story level. ThePhantom, created in 1936 by Lee Falk, is said to be the first of thesuperheroes, and the movie is true to his origins. He doesn't have the absurdpowers of Superman or the catlike grace of Batman, and when he lands on thehood of a speeding truck, the film doesn't do it with alight pounce, but with aheavy thud, as of muscle meeting metal. Although he's known to those who fear him as “The Ghost WhoWalks,” he isn't immortal; he's the 21st in a line of Phantoms, who trace theirheritage back to the first Phantom's vow to fight evil and piracy. (How thePhantoms have found 20 brides willing to live in the Skull Cave is a questionnot answered in this film.) The film stars Billy Zane as the Phantom, a.k.a.mild-mannered Kit Walker. His fury is roused when an evil industrialist namedXander Drax (Treat Williams) schemes to bring together three priceless skullsthat, when assembled, will give him power over mankind. Fighting against Drax'sschemes is a heroic newspaper publisher (Bill Smitrovich), who dispatches hisniece, Diana Palmer (Kristy Swanson), to the jungle in search of one of theskulls. Phantom fans of course know Diane eventually becomes Mrs. Phantom, buthere they are meeting again for the first time after her college courtship withKit that ended when he mysteriously disappeared.Themovie's plot is essentially a series of adventure sequences.There'san aerial dogfight between a Pan American Clipper and two red biplanes. Twoperilous crossings by truck over a disintegrating suspension bridge. Astrangling by skeleton. A chase in which the Phantom and Diane successfullydrop from a plane and land on the back of Hero, the white stallion, just beforethe plane crashes into a mountain.Anda showdown inside an eerie mountain cave, where members of the SinghBrotherhood and Drax battle for the skulls against the Phantom and the forcesof good. At the end, as a bonus, there's a really neat miniature submarine.Thedirector, Simon Wincer, orchestrates these events just a hair this side ofparody. He and Billy Zane find the right tone for the Phantom: bemused,all-knowing, wise, irreverent. “No smoking in the skull cave,” he says at onepoint. And when Diana tries to run the show: “Fine, go ahead--it's your rescue.”The movie's best line is said by a bad guy from the big city who now findshimself, in brown suit and fedora, inside a menacing jungle cavern: “Skulls!Powers of darkness! This isn't right! I was an altar boy, for the love of Pete,at St. Timothy's! The only power I believe in comes out of the barrel of a gun!”Zane plays the Phantom as essentially an ordinary, if talented, human who wearsa purple suit and an eye-mask (of course Diana can’t recognize him when he'swearing the mask). He often functions as the calm center of the storm. TreatWilliams, as Drax, is implacably evil (he blinds a librarian by hidingspring-loaded needles in a microscope) and also slick and oily in the best pulptradition. Kristy Swanson (whose “Buffy the Vampire Slayer” is a cult favorite)is plucky and athletic as Diana, and develops an intriguing relationship withSala (Catherine Zeta-Jones), Xander's dragon-lady sidekick, who softens andchanges sides.Whatall of these people decided, I suppose, was that the great strength of “ThePhantom” was style--which made the classic comic strips stand out from thecrowd, and which might help define the Phantom franchise for modern audiences(since, let's face it, the Phantom is not as big a name as Batman or Superman).The production design by Paul Peters is tirelessly inventive, but also crucialis the photography by David Burr, whose framing creates montages defined like acomic strip.Burrsometimes uses color and composition in much the same spirit as the Glasgowartist Jack Vettriano, whose flashy gangster types and molls in red dressesregard each other in sullen lust.“ThePhantom” was written by Jeffrey Boam, who wrote “Indiana Jones and the LastCrusade.” It has the breakneck energy of the Indiana Jones movies, and the samelove of fedora hats and very big old trucks.Butit's not Indy in a purple suit. It has its own distinctive tone and feel, and acertain innocence; the PG rating indicates it's suitable for families, and soit is, because it lacks unnecessary violence and sexuality--but that doesn'tmean it's not red-blooded. It's in love with a period when there were islandsnot on any map, and one or two brave people could change history, andcharacters could shout out, “Have you heard the exciting news? We're going tothe Devil's Vortex!”
