Shakespeare, "Midsummer Night's Dream" It was thelargest floating object ever built by man. The Titanic was as long as threefootball fields, weighed 46,000 tons and was advertised as unsinkable."Mother thought," remembers Eva Hart, now an old lady, "to callit unsinkable was flying in the face of the Almighty." She was 7 the night the Titanic struckan iceberg, 83 years ago now. Her father put her in a lifeboat, told her it wasa "precautionary measure," and said she would be back on board forbreakfast in the morning. She never saw him again - or her little dog, whopeers up mournfully at us from old photographs. Theloss of the Titanic remains the worst shipwreck in history, and anunforgettable slap at the pride of man. The great ship rests today 400 mileseast of Newfoundland and 2 1/2 miles beneath the ocean surface. For decades, itremained as inaccessible as the moon; indeed, men walked on the moon yearsbefore the first TV probes found the wreck of the Titanic. Now it is possibleto visit the site, using submarines that can withstand ocean pressure so strongthat any leak would cut a body in two."Titanica,"a documentary feature shot in the IMAX process, is based largely on footagefilmed at the Titanic's grave. Seen on the giant, five-story, curving Omnimaxscreen of the Museum of Science and Industry, it is a sight to inspire awe.Ihave seen earlier photography from the Titanic, rather muddy and indistinct,and so I was not quite prepared for the high quality of the photography in"Titanica." Two submersibles were outfitted with IMAX cameras, whichuse film stock that dwarfs conventional movies, and with newly designed lightsgenerating 150,000 watts. The result is positively eerie: At a depth where nosunlight at all penetrates, the subs, sometimes working together, are able tolight up the area so effectively that we see clearly as we drift above thebones of the great ship.Earlyscenes in the film show one of the subs slowly descending, a speck of light inthe darkness. The three-member crews must spend 18 to 25 hours squeezed intotiny quarters on each of their visits, and we see them playing poker and chess,and consuming giant sandwiches. At last, the ocean floor is reached, and adebate breaks out: Are those lumps of coal from the Titanic, or whaledroppings? (Almost all IMAX documentaries have a regrettable tendency toalternate the sublime with the corny.) When the Titanic is finally reached, theeffect is grand, sad and creepy. The documentary footage alternates withphotographs taken before the ship's launching. In one extraordinary scene, thecrew members use remote-controlled pincers to pick up a suitcase from the oceanfloor. After some argument ("It might contain the log book!"), theyreplace it. Then we see a photograph of passengers standing on deck on the dayof sailing. Next to one of them, on the deck, is what looks like the samesuitcase.Thecameras achieve a remarkable intimacy with the vast wreck.Welook out through the windows of the captain's reception room and float past theprivate promenade of J.P. Morgan's suite. We can see the brass fittings of thewheel, still shiny, although the wooden elements have long since disappeared."When the ship reached bottom," a narrator tells us, "therewould have been corpses littered everywhere. But even the skeletons quicklydisappeared in the calcium-depleted water." The debris all tells a story.There are the giant engines, now covered in ropes of sediment. There is atoilet bowl: "Iron," a narrator says. "That would have been forthird class. Second class had porcelain, and first class, of course,marble." And we see a single woman's shoe, resting forever now on the bottom."Titanica"is the second feature-length IMAX production; the Rolling Stones documentary"At the Max" was the first. The process uses film so large that itmust be loaded with a forklift, and there is an intermission while the secondreel is put in place. Given the running time, I would have appreciated moreTitanic footage, and less about the Russian-U.S.-Canadian expedition thatgathered it. The banter of the three-man crew quickly grew tiresome, especiallyas I began to suspect it was not filmed during actual dives (where would theyhave put the camera?).Butthere are extraordinary moments. One is mundane: A scientist obtains a coresample from the ocean bottom and smooths it with a butter knife, showing howfirm it is. In most places, he said, the floor might have been covered withsediment so soft and deep that the Titanic would have disappeared beneath it.But at the spot where she sank, hitting bottom at a speed of 30 M.P.H., thebottom was firm enough to hold her. And so she waits forever, still halfwaythrough her first crossing.
