“The Ghost and the Darkness” is an African adventure that makesthe Tarzan movies look subtle and realistic. It lacks even the usual charm ofbeing so bad it's funny. It's just bad. Not funny. No, wait . . . there is onefunny moment. A bridge-builder takes leave of his pregnant wife to go to Africato build a bridge, and she solemnly observes, “You must go where the riversare.” The bridge man, named Patterson, is played by Val Kilmer in a trim modernhaircut that never grows an inch during his weeks in the bush. He soon isjoined by a great white hunter named Remington (Michael Douglas), whoseappearance is that of a homeless man who somehow got his hands on a rifle. Ifthis were a comic strip, there would be flies buzzing around his head. Themen meet up in Uganda, where a big push is on to complete a railroad fasterthan the Germans or the French. The owner of the rail company is a gruff tycoonwho boasts, “I'm a monster. My only pleasure is tormenting those people whowork for me.” He is too modest. He also torments those who watch this movie.Workon the railroad bridge is interrupted by a lion attack. Patterson spends the nightin a tree and kills a lion. There is much rejoicing. Then another lion attacks.Eventually it becomes clear that two lions are still on the prowl. They aredevilishly clever, dragging men from their cots and even invading a hospital tochew on malaria patients. “Maneaters are always old, and alone, but not thesetwo,” Remington intones solemnly.Therest of the movie consists of Patterson and Remington sitting up all nighttrying to shoot the lions, while the lions continue their attacks. At the end welearn that these two lions killed 135 victims in nine months. The movie onlymakes it seem like there were more, over a longer period.Manyscenes are so inept as to beggar description. Some of the lion attacks seem tohave been staged by telling the actors to scream while a lion rug was waved infront of the camera. Patterson eventually builds a flimsy platform in aclearing, tethers a goat at its base, and waits for the lions. Balanced on awooden beam, he looks this way. Then that way. Then this. Then that. Acompetent editor would have known that all this shifting back and forth wouldbecome distracting. Then a big bird flies at him and knocks him off the beam,and right into a lion's path. Lesson No. 1 in lion hunting: Don't let a bigbird knock you into the path of a lion.Anarrator at the beginning of the film has informed us, “This is a story ofdeath and mystery.” The mystery is why these particular lions behaved as theydid. I don't see why it's a mystery. They had reasons anyone can identify with:They found something they were good at, and grew to enjoy it. The only mysteryis why the screenwriter, William Goldman, has them kill off the two mostinteresting characters so quickly. (They are Angus, the chatty man on the spot,and an African with a magnificently chiseled and stern face.) In the old daysthis movie would have starred Stewart Granger and Trevor Howard, and they wouldhave known it was bad but they would have seemed at home in it, cleaning theirrifles and chugging their gin like seasoned bwanas.ValKilmer and Michael Douglas never for a second look like anything other thanthoroughly unhappy movie stars stuck in a humid climate and a doomedproduction.Ihope someone made a documentary about the making of “The Ghost and theDarkness.” Now that would be a movie worth seeing.
