“Fallen” is the kind of horror story I most enjoy, set inordinary and realistic circumstances, with a villain who lives mostly in ourminds. Movies like this play with our apprehensions, instead of slamming uswith freaky special effects. By suggesting that the evil resides in the realworld, they make everything scary; one of the movie's best moments is suppliedby a pop machine. Denzel Washington stars as John Hobbes, a detective who workswith his partner, good old Jonesy (John Goodman), on murder cases. The filmopens with a flashback (“I want to tell you about the time I almost died”), andthen cuts to Death Row, where a vicious killer (Elias Koteas) faces the gaschamber. Hobbes is among the witnesses as the poison capsule drops, and thekiller uses his dying breath to sing “Time Is on My Side.” And then, this iscurious, there is a point-of-view shot from above the dead man's head, and wewonder whose point of view it could possibly be.Having established the possibility of the supernatural, “Fallen”is at pains to center Hobbes firmly in a real world. The screenplay, by Oscarnominee Nicholas Kazan (“Reversal of Fortune”), shows us Hobbes at home (helives with his brother and nephew) and at work (Jonsey is a good pal, but alieutenant played by Donald Sutherland seems to know more than he says). Thestory develops along the lines of a police procedural, with the copsinvestigating some strange murders, including a corpse left in a bathtub whilethe killer apparently enjoyed a leisurely breakfast.Hobbes notices an incredible coincidence: The dead man in thebathtub is the same man who walked past him last night, drawing his attentionwith his singular manner. Now that's strange. And strange, too, are other developments,including the verdict of a linguist that the gas chamber victim's words, on avideotape, were spoken in ancient Aramaic, a language he had no way of knowing.There is a connection between all these threads, which wediscover along with Hobbes. (The audience discovers it before Hobbes--but wehave the advantage, because we know he's in a horror movie and he doesn't.)Among the characters Hobbes encounters on his search for missing threads, themost interesting is the daughter (Embeth Davidtz) of a cop who committedsuicide after being accused of the kinds of offenses that Hobbes himself nowseems to face. “If you value your life, if there's even one human being youcare about,” she tells him, “walk away from this case.” Did her father leave awarning behind? What is the meaning of the word “Alazel,” scrawled on the wallof the basement where he killed himself? Denzel Washington is convincing as acop, but perhaps not the best choice for the role of Hobbes, which requiresmore of a noir personality. There's something essentially hopeful and sunnyabout Washington, and the best noir heroes encounter grim news as if they wereexpecting it. There should be, at the core of the protagonist in any noirstory, guilt and shame, as if they feel they deserve their fate. Washingtonplays Hobbes more like a conventional hero, and doesn't internalize the evil.As for the rest of the characters, perhaps they are as theyseem, perhaps not, at any given time. The evil presence in the film moves fromperson to person, and there is a chase scene in a crowd that is eerilyeffective, because there's no way to tell who the pursuer is. See the film, andyou'll understand.“Fallen” was directed by Gregory Hoblit, who also made “PrimalFear” (1996). Both films contain characters who are not as they seem, and leadswho are blind-sided by them. “Fallen” reaches further, but doesn't achieve asmuch; the idea is better than the execution, and by the end, the surprisesbecome too mechanical and inevitable. Still, for an hour “Fallen” developsquietly and convincingly, and it never slips down into easy shock tactics.Kazan writes plausible, literate dialogue and Hoblit creates a realistic world,so that the horror never seems, as it does in less ambitious thrillers, to feelat home.
