“Father of the Bride Part II” belongs to the genre that couldperhaps be called Surrogate Happiness Movies. Good things happen to thecharacters, we identify with them, and so in a sense they happen to us. Suchmovies usually contain a minimum of one childbirth scene. Andjust as there is no such thing as an ugly baby, so there is no such thing as abad Surrogate Happiness Movie.Ofcourse, there are many exceptions to that rule. But movies like this butter usup so well that we'd feel like a grouch criticizing them. "Father of theBride Part II" is not a great movie and not even as good as its 1991inspiration (not to mention the Spencer Tracy-Elizabeth Taylor original from1950). But it is warm and fuzzy, and has some good laughs and a lot ofsweetness.Allof the key players return from the earlier film. Steve Martin and Diane Keatonplay George and Nina Banks, a comfortable married couple whose daughter(Kimberly Williams) got married in the previous film and is now about to makethem grandparents. Kieran Culkin, of the Culkin child dynasty, is back asMatty, their younger son. Martin Short and B. D. Wong return as weddingcoordinators who now turn out to be interior decorators as well. And many ofthe supporting characters are the same, as is the expansive old house in whichGeorge and Nina reared their children.Asthe film opens, they're beginning to feel like empty nesters.Mattywill be in college one of these days, and maybe the old house is just too big.Plus, there are maintenance problems. (They stand in the kitchen while waterdrips from the ceiling during a rainstorm, and I guess we're supposed to forgetthey live in a three-story house and that would be one hell of a leak.) Anyway,what with one thingand another,maybe they should move to a smaller place by the beach.Georgeputs the house on the market, sells it immediately, agrees to be out in 10days, and sets in motion a series of family crises that I may very well revealin the paragraphs to come, so read no further (unless you already know thewhole story from seeing the previews).Nina,of course, finds herself unexpectedly in the family way, and so mother anddaughter are both pregnant. No prizes for guessing that they may findthemselves delivering at exactly the same moment.Georgeis aghast at this news. ("Going to the movies - that will be economized:`One child - two seniors.' ") George tries to buy back the family mansion,there are misunderstandings with the in-laws, and a slapstick sequence seems alittle out of place: George takes too many sleeping pills and is subjected toan unwanted prostate procedure (not that there is such a thing as a wantedprostate procedure).Thebig parallel childbirth scene is familiar from many other movies (it was doneto perfection by Dudley Moore in Blake Edwards' "Mickey &Maude"), but it gains a certain weight and credibility by the performanceof Jane Adams as Dr. Eisenberg, the obstetrician. She enters the movieunheralded, projects an unshakable calm and sensible humanity, and turns hersupporting character into an oasis of sanity.Onecan imagine the role being played as all clichés, so it's refreshing to see itreinvented by good acting.SteveMartin supplies the center of the film, as its narrator and comic relief. Onceagain we are reminded that he has a sweet, gentle side to go along with thecynicism of some of his earlier films. The movie was directed and written byCharles Shyer and Nancy Meyers, the husband and wife whose earlier familycomedies include "Irreconcilable Differences" and "BabyBoom," as well as "Father of the Bride." I had the unmistakablefeeling, toward the end of thisfilm, that they may be reaching the end of this particular road and that theremay be new horizons to investigate and new Surrogate Happinesses to explore.
