When Kurt Vonnegut, then in the U.S. Army, was being held in aGerman prison camp, he was asked by his guards why he was not fighting for theGermans--since he had a German name. Vonnegut later confessed in hisintroduction to his novel, Mother Night, “If I'd been born in Germany, Isuppose I would have been a Nazi.” It is easy to lose sight of the fact thatalmost all of us take the side of that country where we are born or that tribewe are born into; for every person who takes sides for ethical reasons, athousand or more take sides because of accidents of geography or birth. “MotherNight,” a difficult movie made from Vonnegut's 1961 novel, is about a man whoselife illustrates that reality. His name is Howard W. Campbell Jr., (Nick Nolte)and he is born in the United States but moves with his family to Berlin in1919. He grows up, becomes a successful playwright, marries an actress, and bythen the war clouds are gathering. Should he stay in Germany or return toAmerica? An American agent (John Goodman) makes it easy for him, by asking himto stay and deliver anti-Semitic and anti-American diatribes on Nazi radio.Through a subtly coded system of pauses and coughs, the broadcasts will alsocarry secret information of great use to the Allies.Ihave no doubt that such systems were in fact used, but for the purposes of “MotherNight” this scheme is ideal: It puts Campbell on both sides of the same fence.As his German father-in-law tells him, “Even if you were a spy, you servedGermany more than the enemy.” Did he? The experience at the time indicates thatnone of the propaganda broadcasts (by Tokyo Rose, Lord Haw Haw, Ezra Pound,etc.) had much of an effect, since they were seen as exactly what they were.Campbell'ssecret handler tells him that the American government will never claim him orcome to his rescue. After the war is over, and he sees with his own eyes thehorror of the death camps, Campbell is able to make his way to New York City,where he lives for almost 15 years under his own name; no one can believe he isthe same person as the notorious traitor.Ifthe movie had been played out in this tone, I might have felt it worked better.That tone would not, however, have been Vonnegut's, which is more daring butharder to film. He adopts a wry angle toward his material, hinting at themadness and evil which lurk just below the surface of civilization, and themovie follows its story into Vonnegut land. A neo-Nazi newspaper publishes hisaddress, and Campbell finds himself consorting with American Nazis and assortedother fauna, including “the black fuehrer of Harlem” and the nice old manacross the hall (Alan Arkin), who is a Nazi--or then again, perhaps he isn't.Helga, his German wife, thought dead in a Russian attack, turns up again--orthen again, perhaps she doesn't.Thisunwelcome publicity causes Campbell a dilemma: Which side was he on? Was he anAmerican who inadvertently helped the Nazis? An American not reluctant to helpthe Nazis? A Nazi posing as an American? His old handler (Goodman) turns upagain, but cannot help him, and eventually he finds himself standing stockstill in the street one day, because he has no reason to move in any direction.Hisparalysis is broken by the Israelis, who arrest him and take him to Israel fortrial as a war criminal. He is given a typewriter and three weeks to write hismemoir (the cell scenes are the movie's framing device), and he can talk with,but not see, one of his fellow prisoners, Adolf Eichmann. His story concludes,I suppose, in the only way it should. It is a tribute to Nolte's performancethat while we are confused about the meaning of the story, we never doubt thepresentation of his character.Walkingout of “Mother Night,” I asked myself what statement, exactly, the movie hadmade. I could not answer. Campbell is a man without a country, without corebeliefs. It is impossible to say for sure which side he was on, and which sidehe harmed more. He was a man prepared to take the most convenient course, andfor him the ability to stay in Germany and become a famous propagandist (winedand dined by top Nazis) was very convenient, especially if he could pass alongsecret messages for the Americans, which was convenient, too.Theconvenience for Campbell ended when the Nazis lost the war. Since the Americanswere never going to claim him, it would have been more convenient if Germanyhad won. I assume in that case that Campbell would have stayed in Germany,would have been celebrated as a hero, and eventually would have been given a plumjob. The dilemma Vonnegut sets him is that he cannot jump off the ship it wasconvenient for him to sail through the war on.Vonnegutwants to show us a man very much like most of us, no smarter, no braver, whodoes what he does because it will contribute to his comfort and perhaps to hissurvival. There but for the grace of God go we, drifting through life havingbenefitted from chance and convenience, hoping the day will not come when wehave to risk everything by declaring ourselves. It takes an extraordinary manto stand outside his tribe and try to see what is objectively good and right.Campbell was not within miles of being that man.Doesthe film work? Not really. It loses itself in comic caricatures of the looniesthat Campbell meets in New York; and its melodramatic double-reverses, bymaking the plot seem arbitrary, rob it of importance. Nor does the film, withinitself, make clear what it thinks. We can think about it afterwards, and thatis instructive, but “Mother Night” is like notes for a lecture that is notcompleted.
