One of the perennial dilemmas of movie biographies is that it iseasy to film gossip and hard to film art. Thus we get great artists who spendvast quantities of time in bed, leaping up occasionally to dash off a painting,when in real life it was probably more a case of hours spent at work, and thena quick leap into the sack. PabloPicasso was one of the more notorious lovers of the century, a man who did notdisrespect women so much as value them highly as replaceable possessions. Hisfirst love was art, his second love was himself, his third love was what womencould do for him. During the decades of his greatness there was no shortage ofwomen eager to see it his way.In“Surviving Picasso,” one of his mistresses, Dora Maar, says, “Without him,there is nothing. After Picasso, only God.” And another of his lovers, thefaithful Marie-Therese Walter, complains sadly of her poverty while stillsaving every Thursday and Sunday for his visits. (She is the only person hewill trust to cut his hair and nails, and she saves all of the clippings--athis insistence, to be sure, not hers.) “Surviving Picasso” is the story of onelover who was not destroyed by Picasso: Francoise Gilot, who was his mistressfrom the mid-1940s to the mid-1950s, bore him two children, and walked away inone piece. Played by Natascha McElhone, she is an elegant young woman whoprojects more confidence than she probably feels the first time she entersPicasso's studio.Hehas picked her up in Le Petit Benoit, a little Left Bank bistro, leaving Dora'stable to join her, and in his invitation he's left little doubt of hisintentions: “Come and see me--but come as if you like me, not because you'revisiting the Holy Shrine of Fatima.” There is another warning signal as sheenters: “You're now in the labyrinth of the Minotaur,” he says, “who perishesif he doesn't devour at least two young ladies a day.” Why did so many womenfind Picasso irresistible, even in his old age? Perhaps because he felt himselfto be irresistible. And certainly because he was Picasso, who through oneperiod and into another successfully maintained his reputation as the century'sgreatest artist.Picassois played here by Anthony Hopkins, in another great biographical interpretationby an actor of limitless resources. It is less than a year since he convincedme he was Richard Nixon; now he disappears into the idea of Picasso. As Hopkinscreates Picasso, he is cruel, abrupt, vain, stingy, a sexual glutton, and yetwe can see the dazzling charm and effortless confidence--the certainty ofgreatness--that inspired new lovers to pursue him, brushing aside all warnings.(“Listen,” says Picasso's servant as Gilot falls into the net, “it would bebetter for you to go home.”) The movie is made at one remove from its primarysources. The Merchant-Ivory team was not able to obtain the rights to Gilot'sown autobiography, or the permission to show any of Picasso's artwork. So theyused another book about Picasso and his lovers (“Picasso: Creator andDestroyer,” by Arianna Stassinopoulos), and commissioned fake Picassos. Accessto the originals might not have made a difference, since the movie's weaknessis its inability to see past Gilot to the great man. “Surviving Picasso”proceeds as if the most important thing in Picasso's life during his time withFrancoise was Francoise. (I am reminded of the old story about the actor hiredto play a gravedigger in “Hamlet,” who describes the play as “about thisgravedigger who meets a prince.”) We see scenes of seduction, quarrels, andselfishness. We see a faithful chauffeur dismissed after 25 years for a momentof carelessness. We hear the complaints of Picasso's long-suffering assistant,who reveals to Francoise that he is married, lives in a garret, and has to payfor his own train tickets when summoned to join Picasso out of town. This isthe backstairs litany of retainers, more interesting in footnotes than as themain story.Eventhis limited viewpoint is marred further by two structural problems: The moviebreaks down into anecdotes that don't flow or build, and everything is narratedby the Gilot character. McElhone, who is electric and convincing when she'sonscreen, is a bad voice-over narrator, and screenwriter Ruth Prawer Jhabvalahas not helped with language that seems formal and stilted, like a schoolgirl'scommentary for an educational film.Thereis much to admire in “Surviving Picasso,” especially in Hopkins' performanceand in the flashes that all of the supporting characters bring. (Joss Acklandhas a gentle charm as Henri Matisse, Joan Plowright is self-assured asFrancoise's grandmother, and Julianne Moore is edgy and resigned as Dora Maar.)But when it is over we are left with the conclusion that if Picasso had notbeen a great artist, this story would not have much mattered; as a beast towardwomen, he was nothing special.
