I wish we could simply dispense with a review and handle thingsthis way: You go see the movie, and then we'll sit down and have a long andvery detailed talk. And you will try to explain to me how the last scene in themovie, the one that is supposed to provide the key, fits in with what has gonebefore. BecauseI don't think it does. Or can. Or should. I suppose the final twist is somesort of attempt by the writer-director, Amy Holden Jones, to pull the same kindof trick on the audience that “The Usual Suspects” did. I don't pretend tounderstand that film fully, either, but I am at least prepared to give its plotthe benefit of the doubt: I believe that close story analysis would not findany actual or absolute impossibilities.With“The Rich Man's Wife,” what we are given is the twist without the twister orthe twistee, if you see what I mean. (Don't for a moment fear I am going togive anything away, since in my current state I would be incapable of knowingwhat to give away, or how to do it.) The movie proceeds more or lesssatisfactorily for 94 minutes, and then in the last 60 seconds expects us torevise everything we thought we knew, or guessed, or figured out--just becauseof an arbitrary ending. That went against my grain. It wasn't playing fair. Noteven fair by the “Usual Suspects” rules.Hereis the story as we have reason to believe it. A blustering, hard-drinkingbusiness executive named Tony (Christopher McDonald) is married to anattractive younger wife named Josie (Halle Berry). Worried about him, shepersuades him to take a vacation in the woods, but when he's called back totown she goes to a local bar to console herself, and soon her path crosses thatof a man named Cole (Peter Greene).Hefollows her home into the deep, dark woods. Her Jeep breaks down. He is thereto help. He is threatening but ingratiating. He gathers that she is unhappywith her husband. Well, tonight, she is. But when he says he'll fix things bykilling Tony, she's horrified. Tony met her, Josie explains, when she was aconfused 17-year-old runaway. He asked her to marry him on their first date.Yes, he drinks too much, and there are other problems, but she is stillgrateful to him and has hopes for their future.Coledoesn't seem to hear her, and eventually the situation grows into a nightmare.Tony is killed. Josie is a suspect. There is more: Josie has been conducting anaffair with Jake (Clive Owen), Tony's partner in a failing restaurant. Josiestands to inherit a lot of money--or does she? If she does, she'll bail outJake--or will she? How much does Jake's wife, Nora (Clea Lewis), know? Whatabout those compromising Polaroids of Josie and Jake that she delivers to thepolice? Can the police really believe Josie's story that Cole acted on his own?And so on. This plot is not blindingly original; its elements are familiar frommany other crime stories. But it does become intriguing because the writing isgood and the characters are original--especially two cops in key supportingroles, who argue over whether Josie is a suspect only because she's a blackwoman married to a white man. There are also amusing scenes involving Nora, whois played by Lewis as a ditzy goofball with a mind of her own.HalleBerry is convincing, too, and I cared about her, especially as the plot beganto turn against her. Was she innocent or guilty? Innocent, I thought, althoughmaybe guilty if the evidence is looked at in a certain way. What I was notprepared for was the twist at the end, which doesn't seem to follow fromanything that went before, and makes all of my speculation irrelevant.AmI holding the ending against the entire movie? Yes, I suppose I am. “The RichMan's Wife” is not a great movie, but it's competent and effective enough, andI might have been tempted to give it a recommendation if I hadn't felt socheated at the end. Somehow a movie like this establishes a contract with us,an unspoken agreement that some things cannot be doubted even though others areup for grabs. When a few of the sure things turn out to be tricks, that's partof the fun. But when *everything* is smoke and mirrors, I walk out wondering,where is Keyser Soze when we really need him?
