The teenage boy's name is Danny (Matt Keeslar), and he lives athome with his father (Albert Finney), the local policeman. Life moves slowly intheir rural district - so slowly that his father actually prays for "onegood murder - that's all I ask." Things look up when a corpse is found bya road, but it turns out to belong to a drunk, decapitated by a hedge trimmingmachine. Bad luck. Oneday, Danny gets a glimpse of a red-haired girl named Annagh (Victoria Smurfit),and falls instantly in love. He even gets involved in a foolhardy bungeejumping stunt just to impress her, and before long, they've met and fallen inlove. This is the first time Danny has experienced true love, and his knowledgeof sex is limited.He'scoached by his best pal, Prunty (Anthony Brophy). The relationship betweenDanny and Annagh is as idealistic and innocent, in its way, as the love storyin the wonderful Irish film "Circle of Friends," although thecharacters are a good deal simpler.Thefather, alas, is not. As written by Shane Connaughton and played by Finney, heseems made out of two different versions of the same character. At times, hecomes across as a hard-drinking bully, mean-spirited and closed-minded. Atother times, he relaxes into the role of a sunny philosopher. We never knowwhere we stand with him, and I'm not sure that's the film's intention.Thestory has a double edge itself. There are goofy stunts, like the time Pruntyencourages Danny to put on a priest's vestments, and Danny blesses a farmer'sbeloved sow. The way this scene pays off - with indignation from the realpriest - belongs in a screwball comedy, and doesn't fit with the darker tonesof this story.Iwas least convinced by the closing scenes, which I can't discuss withoutrevealing important plot points. But ask yourself whether developments don'tcome rather quickly, in an unlikely fashion; melodrama takes over from thefilm's generally realistic tone. I was also, at times, not sure of Annagh'smotivation, and couldn't figure out why such a smart young woman wouldn't do orsay a few obvious things to make the situation easier."TheRun of the Country" was directed by Peter Yates, who in "BreakingAway" (1979) found exactly the right tone in a comedy about a family, andseems to be trying for some of the same notes here. I think perhaps he shouldhave decided whether he was making a tragedy or a comedy, and then left out thematerial that didn't fit. The movie has too many scenes that work well on theirown, but don't add to the final effect.
