The little girls had gone to church early for choir practice,and we can imagine them, dressed in their Sunday best, meeting their friends inthe room destroyed by the bomb. We can fashion the picture in our minds becauseLee has, in a way, brought them back to life, through photographs, through oldhome movies and especially through the memories of their families and friends. By coincidence, I was listening to the radio not long afterseeing “4 Little Girls,” and I heard a report from Charlayne Hunter-Gault. In1961, when she was 19, she was the first black woman to desegregate theUniversity of Georgia. Today she is an NPR correspondent. That is what happenedto her. In 1963, Carole Robertson was 14, and her Girl Scout sash was coveredwith merit badges. Because she was killed that day, we will never know whatwould have happened in her life.That thought keeps returning: The four little girls never got togrow up. Not only were their lives stolen, but so were their contributions toours. I have a hunch that Denise McNair, who was 11 when she died, would havemade her mark. In home movies, she comes across as poised and observant, filledwith charisma. Among the many participants in the film, two of the moststriking are her parents, Chris and Maxine McNair, who remember a specialchild.Chris McNair talks of a day when he took Denise to downtownBirmingham, and the smell of onions frying at a store's lunch counter made herhungry. “That night I knew I had to tell her she couldn't have that sandwichbecause she was black,” he recalls. “That couldn't have been any less painfulthan seeing her with a rock smashed into her head.” Lee's film re-creates theday of the bombing through newsreel footage, photographs and eyewitnessreports. He places it within a larger context of the Southern civil rightsmovement, and sit-ins and the arrests, the marches, the songs and the killings.Birmingham was a tough case. Police commissioner Bull Connor isseen directing the resistance to marchers and traveling in an armoredvehicle--painted white, of course. Gov. George Wallace makes his famous vow tostand in the schoolhouse door and personally bar any black students fromentering. Though they could not know it, their resistance was futile afterSept. 15, 1963, because the hatred exposed by the bomb pulled all of theirrhetoric and rationalizations out from under them.Spike Lee says he has wanted to make this film since 1983, whenhe read a New York Times Magazine article by Howell Raines about the bombing. “Hewrote me asking permission back then,” Chris McNair told me in an interview. “Thatwas before he had made any of his films.” It is perhaps good that Lee waited,because he is more of a filmmaker now, and events have supplied him adenouement in the conviction of a man named Robert Chambliss (“Dynamite Bob”)as the bomber. He was, said Raines, who met quite a few, “the most pathologicalracist I've ever encountered.” The other victims were Addie Mae Collins andCynthia Wesley, both 14. In shots that are almost unbearable, we see thevictims' bodies in the morgue. Why does Lee show them? To look full into theface of what was done, I think. To show racism its handiwork. There is a memoryin the film of a burly white Birmingham policeman who after the bombing tells ablack minister, “I really didn't believe they would go this far.” The man was aKlansman, the movie says, but in using the word “they” he unconsciouslyseparates himself from his fellows. He wants to disassociate himself from thecrime. So did others. Before long even Wallace was apologizing for his behaviorand trying to define himself in a different light. There is a scene in the filmwhere the former governor, now old and infirm, describes his black personalassistant, Eddie Holcey, as his best friend. “I couldn't live without him,”Wallace says, dragging Holcey in front of the camera, insensitive to thefeelings of the man he is tugging over for display.Why is that scene there? It's sort of associated with the morguephotos, I think. There is mostly sadness and regret at the surface in “4 LittleGirls,” but there is anger in the depths, as there should be.
