There is a moment early in "Apollo 13" when astronautJim Lovell is taking some press on a tour of the Kennedy Space Center, and hebrags that they have a computer "that fits in one room and can send outmillions of instructions." And I'm thinking to myself, hell, I'm writingthis review on a better computer than the one that got us to the moon. "Apollo13" inspires many reflections, and one of them is that America's spaceprogram was achieved with equipment that would look like tin cans today. LikeLindbergh, who crossed the Atlantic in the first plane he could string togetherthat might make it, we went to the moon the moment we could, with the toolsthat were at hand.Today,with new alloys, engines, fuels, computers and technology, it would be saferand cheaper - but we have lost the will."Apollo13" never really states its theme, except perhaps in one sentence ofnarration at the end, but the whole film is suffused with it: The space programwas a really extraordinary thing, something to be proud of, and those who wentinto space were not just "heroes," which is a cliché, but brave andresourceful.Thosequalities were never demonstrated more dramatically than in the flight of the13th Apollo mission in April 1970, when an oxygen tank exploded en route to themoon. The three astronauts on board - Jim Lovell, Fred Haise and Jack Swigert -were faced with the possibility of becoming marooned in space. Their oxygencould run out, they could be poisoned by carbon dioxide accumulations, or theycould freeze to death. If somehow they were able to return to the Earth'satmosphere, they had to enter at precisely the right angle.Toosteep an entry, and they would be incinerated; too shallow, and they would skipoff the top of the atmosphere like a stone on a pond, and fly off forever intospace.RonHoward's film of this mission is directed with a single-mindedness andattention to detail that makes it riveting. He doesn't make the mistake ofadding cornball little subplots to popularize the material; he knows he has agreat story, and he tells it in a docudrama that feels like it was filmed onlocation in outer space.Soconvincing are the details, indeed, that I went back to look at "For AllMankind," the great 1989 documentary directed by ex-astronaut Al Reinert,who co-wrote "Apollo 13." It was an uncanny experience, like lookingat the origins of the current picture.Countlessdetails were exactly the same: the astronauts boarding the spacecraft, thelift-off, the inside of the cabin, the view from space, the chilling sight oftheir oxygen supply venting into space, even the little tape recorder floatingin free-fall, playing country music.Allthese images are from the documentary, all look almost exactly the same in themovie, and that is why Howard has been at pains to emphasize that every shot in"Apollo 13" is new. No documentary footage was used. The specialeffects - models, animation, shots where the actors were made weightless byfloating inside a descending airplane - have re-created the experience exactly.Theastronauts are played by Tom Hanks (Lovell), Bill Paxton (Haise) and KevinBacon (Swigert). The pilot originally scheduled for the Apollo 13 mission wasKen Mattingly (Gary Sinise), who was grounded because he had been exposed tothe measles. The key figure at Houston Mission Control is Gene Kranz (EdHarris). Clean-cut, crew-cut, wearing white collars even in space, theastronauts had been built up in the public mind as supermen, but as Tom Wolfe'sbook and Phil Kaufman's movie "The Right Stuff" revealed, they weremore likely to be hot-shot test pilots (with the exception of John Glenn) thanstraight arrows.Themovie begins with the surprise selection of Lovell's group to crew Apollo 13.We meet members of their families, particularly Marilyn Lovell (KathleenQuinlan), we follow some of the training, and then the movie follows theill-fated mission, in space and on the ground. Kranz, the Harris character,chain-smoking Camels, masterminds the ground effort to figure out how (and if)Apollo 13 can ever return.Ascheme is dreamed up to shut down power in the space capsule and move theastronauts into the lunar exploratory module, as a sort of temporary lifeboat.The lunar lander will be jettisoned at the last minute, and the main capsule'sweakened batteries may have enough power left to allow the crew to returnalive.Meanwhile,the problem is to keep them from dying in space.Ascrubber to clean carbon dioxide from the capsule's air supply is jerry-builtout of materials on board (and you can see a guy holding one just like it in"For All Mankind"). And you begin to realize, as the astronauts swingaround the dark side of the moon and head for home, that, given the enormity ofthe task of returning to Earth, their craft and equipment is only a little moreadequate than the rocket sled in which Evil Knievel proposed to hurtle acrossSnake River Canyon at about the same time.RonHoward has become a director who specializes in stories involving large groupsof characters: "Cocoon," "Parenthood,""Backdraft," "The Paper." Those were all films that paidattention to the individual human stories involved; they were a triumph ofconstruction, indeed, in keeping many stories afloat and interesting.With"Apollo 13," he correctly decides that the story is in the mission.There is a useful counterpoint in the scenes involving Lovell's wife, waitingfearfully on the ground. (She tells their son, "Something broke on yourdaddy's spaceship, and he's going to have to turn around before he even gets tothe moon.") But Howard adds no additional side stories, no little paralleldramas, as a lesser director might have.Thisis a powerful story, one of the year's best films, told with great clarity andremarkable technical detail, and acted without pumped-up histrionics. It'sabout men trained to do a job, and doing a better one than anyone could haveimagined. The buried message is: When we dialed down the space program, we lostsomething crucial to our vision. When I was a kid, they used to predict that bythe year 2000, you'd be able to go to the moon. Nobody ever thought to predictthat you'd be able to, but nobody would bother.
