The first time Lytton Strachey saw Dora Carrington, he asked,"Who is that ravishing boy?" When he discovered she was a girl with atomboy haircut, he was struck dumb; at their first meeting, conversation cameto a complete stall, and in embarrassment he picked up a book and pretended toread. He was a homosexual in his mid-30s, dry, bearded, reserved. She was apainter, 15 years younger. Nothing could have been more out of character thanfor him suddenly to lean over and kiss her, while they were on a walk throughthe countryside. Buthe did.Theopening scenes of "Carrington" try to explain the beginnings of oneof the oddest romances of the Bloomsbury Group, that gathering of Britishgeniuses, eccentrics and self-publicists that produced no romances that werenot odd. In Christopher Hampton's film, Carrington (she hated the"Dora" and dropped it) visits Strachey's bedside with a scissors, tochop off his beard in retaliation for the kiss. But then, regarding hissleeping face, she undergoes a sudden transformation into love. Stracheyawakens and sees her looming over him: "Have you brought me mybreakfast?" Strachey (Jonathan Pryce) and Carrington (Emma Thompson) werein love, after their fashion, for 17 years, until his death, followed shortlyby her own. During much of that time, they occupied Ham Spray House, inBerkshire, with a series of other lovers, some of them shared. Carrington eventuallymarried Rex Partridge, who Strachey said should change his name to Ralph, whichhe did. In one scene, the three of them share the same bed, somewhat uneasily("There are times when I feel like a character in a play by Moliere,"Strachey said).Althoughphysical passion no doubt figured at some time, in some way, in all of theirlives, they were so reserved about it that the movie leaves us wondering ifthey wouldn't really rather engage in repartee than sex. "Ah, semen!"says Strachey. "What is it about that ridiculous white secretion thatpulls down the corners of an Englishman's mouth?" The movie's only sexscene is so discreet that we can only presume what is happening; during it,Strachey has the facial expression of a person being inoculated.Whatthey did share was a platonic love, which was real, and endured. Strachey wasfamous above all for Eminent Victorians (1921), the myth-shattering book thattreated such icons as Florence Nightingale to portraits written with skepticismand irony. Like all in the Bloomsbury circle, he was famous for his verbal wit,and Pryce is meticulous in the way he speaks in epigrams while somehow soundingspontaneous. Startled by the pop of a champagne cork, he exclaims, "Goodlord, imagine what the war will be like!" Even on his deathbed, he wasstill in production: "If this is dying, then I don't think much ofit." The screenplay for "Carrington" was written some 20 yearsago by Hampton, a playwright ("Tales from Hollywood") who won an Oscarfor his script for "Dangerous Liaisons." He decided to direct thefilm only after Mike Newell ("Four Weddings And A Funeral") droppedout. Pryce, famous on the London stage for "Miss Saigon" and onAmerican television for Infiniti commercials, was already on board, as wasThompson, who had developed a specialty in unrequited love ("Remains ofthe Day," "Howards End").Whatthey are up against is a "romance" that fits no conventional mold andis not expressed in ordinary ways. Even at the film's end, when we get theline, "No one will ever know the happiness of our lives together,"we're tempted to think, "And no wonder." Since Pryce's Strachey is sodeeply reserved, it is up to Thompson to project the warmth they bothpresumably felt, and she does that with her eyes and her silences; she looks athim like a woman in love.Everyonein the Bloomsbury crowd (Virginia and Leonard Woolf, Roger Fry, John MaynardKeynes, E. M. Forster, Clive and Vanessa Bell, Duncan Grant) were known forfreedom, even recklessness, in their choices of romantic partners. A diagram oftheir love affairs would look like an underground system where every trainstopped at every station. And yet they were all so reined in by the Britishupper-class trait of repressed emotion that when anger and jealousy do emerge (asthey do, twice, in "Carrington"), the breach of manners is almostmore shocking than the sexual infidelity under complaint.Weare left to guess what emotions seethed beneath the surface of wit andacceptance.Thereis one scene in "Carrington" that suggests the depths of Carrington'sheart better than dialogue ever could. One evening after dinner, she wanders onthe lawn at Ham Spray House, and through the open, brightly lit windows she isable to observe her lovers, past and present, paired off with their presentlovers. As her gaze goes from one window to another, we see her as an outsider.But that is not the whole story, because you could take any of the partnersfrom "Carrington" and put them on the lawn, and pair off the othersinside, and the effect would be the same. Somehow, for all of them, standingoutside on the lawn must have been part of the fun.
