Spike Lee's "Get on the Bus” is a moviemade in haste and passion, and that may account for its uncanny effect: We feelclose to the real, often unspoken, issues involving race in America, withoutthe distance that more time and money might have provided. The film follows agroup of about 20 black men on a cross-country bus trip to the Million ManMarch on Oct. 16, 1995, and it opens exactly one year later. Lee made the moviequickly, after 15 black men invested in the enterprise. He shot in 16 mm andvideo, always in and around the bus, using the cross-section of its passengersto show hard truths, and falsehoods, too. If the movie's central sadness isthat we identify with our own group and suspect outsiders, the movie's messageis that we have been given brains to learn to empathize.There are all kinds ofmen on the bus. The tour leader (Charles S. Dutton) will be an inspiration anda referee. Another steadying hand is supplied by the oldest man on board, Jeremiah(Ossie Davis), a student of black history who delights in informing whitecowboys that a black cowboy invented steer wrestling.Also on board are afather (Thomas Jefferson Byrd) and his young son (DeAundre Bonds), who havebeen shackled together by a court order; the irony of going to the march inchains is not lost on the others. An ex-Marine (Isaiah Washington), who is gay,boards the bus with his lover (Harry Lennix) and they're singled out forpersecution by a homophobic would-be actor (Andre Braugher). And alight-skinned man (Roger Guenveur Smith) is revealed as a cop assigned to SouthCentral. Then there's a UCLA film student (Hill Harper), who is shooting avideo documentary. And a member of the Nation of Islam (Gabriel Casseus), inblack suit, bow tie and dark glasses, who says not one word during the journey.During the course ofthe trip, conversations will be philosophical, humorous, sad, nostalgic, angryand sometimes very personal. The homosexual couple provokes the hostility ofthe gay-hater; prejudice knows no color line. That's true, too, in theattitudes toward the cop, whose skin is so light that he could pass for white,and who, it is revealed, became a cop in part because his black father, also acop, was killed ("yes,” he says, "by a brother”)."The man sayshe's black, he's black,” pronounces Ossie Davis. But then the cop himself isrevealed to have blinkers on. Another man reveals he's a former gang member,"cripping since I smoked a guy on my 13th birthday,” but that now he doessocial work with "kids at risk.” No matter; the cop warns him: "Whenwe get back to L.A., I'm going to have to arrest you.”For many white people,a distressing element of the Million Man March was the racial slant of itsconvener, Louis Farrakhan, who has made many anti-Semitic and anti-white slurs.Lee could have ducked this area, but doesn't. When the bus breaks down, thereplacement driver (Richard Belzer) is a Jewish man who keeps quiet as long ashe can, then speaks out about Farrakhan's libels against Jews. "At leastmy parents did their part,” he says; they were civil-rights activists. He citesFarrakhan's statements that Judaism is a "gutter religion” and"Hitler was a great man.” After some of the tour members recycle old clichésabout Jewish landlords, the Belzer character says, "I wouldn't expect youto drive a bus to a Klan meeting,” and walks away from the bus at a rest stop.Dutton takes over driving.This is, I think, aforthright way to deal with Farrakhan's attitudes; the bus driver expresseswidely felt beliefs in the white community, and acts on his moral convictions.For the men on the bus, quite simply, "this march is not about Farrakhan.”We expect that the Nation of Islam member will speak up to defend his leader,but he never does, and his silence, behind his dark glasses, acts as a powerfulsymbol of a religion that none of the other men on the bus seem to relate to,or even care much about.As the journeycontinues, Lee brings in other characters who illustrate the complexity of racein America. There is a satiric cameo by Wendell Pierce as a prosperous Lexusdealer, who boards the bus in mid-journey and puffs on a cigar while airilyexpressing self-hating cliches about blacks. Then, in Tennessee, the reason forthe march comes into sharp focus when the bus is pulled over by white cops.They bring a drug-sniffing dog on board, and treat the men in a subtle butunmistakably racist way. When the cops leave, Lee gives us a series of close-upsof silent, thoughtful faces: Every black man in America has at one time oranother felt charged by the police with the fact of being black.What makes "Geton the Bus” extraordinary is the truth and feeling that go into its episodes.Spike Lee and his actors face one hard truth after another, in scenes of greatpower. I have always felt Lee exhibits a particular quality of fairness in hisfilms. "Do the Right Thing" was so even-handed that it was possiblefor a black viewer to empathize with Sal, the pizzeria owner, and a white viewerto empathize with Mookie, the black kid who starts the riot that burns downSal's Pizzeria.Lee doesn't haveheroes and villains. He shows something bad -- racism -- that in countless waysclouds all of our thinking. "Get on the Bus” is fair in the same sense. Itis more concerned with showing how things are than with scoring cheaprhetorical points. This is a film with a full message for the heart, and themind.
