John Sayles' "Lone Star" contains so many riches, ithumbles ordinary movies. And yet they aren't thrown before us, to dazzle andimpress: It is only later, thinking about the film, that we appreciate the fullreach of its material. I've seen it twice, and after the second viewing, Ibegan to realize how deeply, how subtly, the film has been constructed. Onthe surface, it's pure entertainment. It involves the discovery of a skeletonin the desert of a Texas town near the Mexican border. The bones belong to asheriff from the 1950s, much hated. The current sheriff suspects the murder mayhave been committed by his own father. As he explores the secrets of the past,he begins to fall in love all over again with the woman he loved when they wereteenagers.Thosestories -- the murder and the romance -- provide the film's spine and draw usthrough to the end. But Sayles is up to a lot more than murders and lovestories. We begin to get a feel for the people of Rio County, where whites,blacks, Chicanos and Seminoles all remember the past in different ways. Weunderstand that the dead man, Sheriff Charlie Wade, was a sadistic monster whostrutted through life, his gun on his hip, making up the law as he went along.That many people had reason to kill him -- not least his deputy, Buddy Deeds(Matthew McConaughey). They exchanged death threats in a restaurant, shortlybefore Charlie disappeared. Buddy became the next sheriff.NowCharlie's skull, badge and Masonic ring have been discovered on an old Armyfiring range, and Buddy's son, Sam Deeds (Chris Cooper) is the sheriff on thecase. He wanders through town, talking to his father's old deputy (CliftonJames), and to Big Otis (Ron Canada), who ran the only bar in the county whereblacks were welcome, and to Mercedes Cruz (Miriam Colon), who runs the popularMexican restaurant where the death threat took place.Alongthe way, Sam does a favor. A kid has been arrested for maybe stealing carradios. He releases him to the custody of his mother, Pilar (Elizabeth Pena).He is pleased to see her again. Pilar and Sam were in love as teenagers, buttheir parents forced them to break up, maybe because both families opposed aMexican-Anglo marriage. Now, tentatively, they begin to see each other again. Onenight in an empty restaurant, they play "Since I Left You, Baby" onthe jukebox and dance, having first circled each other warily in a moment ofgreat eroticism.Allof these events unfold so naturally and absorbingly that all we can do issimply follow along. Sayles has made other films following many threads (his"City of Hope" in 1991 traced a tangled human web through thepolitics of a New Jersey city). But never before has he done it in such aspellbinding way; like Faulkner, he creates a sure sense of the way the pasthaunts the present, and how old wounds and secrets are visited upon thesurvivors."LoneStar" is not simply about the solution to the murder and the outcome ofthe romance. It is about how people try to live together at this moment inAmerica. There are scenes that at first seem to have little to do with thestory's main lines. A school board meeting, for example, at which parents argueabout textbooks (and are really arguing about whose view of Texas history willprevail).Scenesinvolving the African-American colonel (Joe Morton) in charge of the local Armybase, whose father was Big Otis, owner of the bar.Anotherscene involving a young black woman, an Army private, whose interview with hercommanding officer reveals a startling insight into why people enlist in theArmy. And conversations between Sheriff Deeds and old widows with longmemories.Theperformances are all perfectly eased together; you feel these characters havelived together for a long time and known things they have not spoken about foryears. Chris Cooper, as Sam Deeds, is a tall, laconic presence that movesthrough the film, learning something here and something there and eventuallylearning something about himself. Cooper looks a little like Sayles; theyproject the same watchful intelligence.AsPilar, Elizabeth Pena is a warm, rich female presence; her love for Sam is notbased on anything simple like eroticism or need, but on a deep, fierceconviction that this should be her man.KrisKristofferson is hard-edged and mean-eyed as Charlie Wade, and there is a scenewhere he shoots a man and then dares his deputy to say anything about it.Wade's evil spirit in the past is what haunts the whole film, and must beexorcised.Andthen there is so much more. I will not even hint at the surprises waiting foryou. They're not Hollywood-style surprises -- or yes, in a way, they are -- butthey're also truths that grow out of the characters; what we learn seems notonly natural, but instructive, and by the end of the film, we know somethingabout how people have lived together in this town, and what it has cost them."LoneStar” is a great American movie, one of the few to seriously try to regard withopen eyes the way we live now. Set in a town that until very recently wasrigidly segregated, it shows how Chicanos, blacks, whites and Indians shared acommon history, and how they knew one another and dealt with one another inways that were off the official map. This film is a wonder -- the best work yetby one of our most original and independent filmmakers -- and after it is over,and you begin to think about it, its meanings begin to flower.
