"The Public Eye" contains a couple of great juicymovie performances. They're from Joe Pesci and Barbara Hershey, playing NewYork City fringe-dwellers who try to make a living from the kinds of people whocome out after dark. They also fall in love, I think. You may thinkdifferently. They're the kind of people who should ask themselves, "Am Ireally in love, or does it just feel so good when I stop hitting myself overthe head with this pistol butt?" It's the 1940s. Pesci plays a guy namedBernzy, who is a free-lance photographer for the tabloids. He cruises the nightin a souped-up coupe with a police radio under the dash and a darkroom in thetrunk. He takes pictures of mobsters, politicians, crooks, gamblers, cops andladies who ain't no ladies. A lot of these people are dead when they sit fortheir portraits. When Bernzy sells a picture to the Daily News, they run acredit line that says "Photo by the Great Bernzini." He takes hiswork seriously. Someday he wants to publish a book of his photos. He thinksordinary pictures of ordinary people can be art. Bernzy reminds me of Weegee,the great New York street photographer who also took pictures of thedisreputable and the unlovely and thought his work was art. They laughed athim, but check out his prices in the galleries. Bernzy is the perpetual outsider. His relationships are allthrough the view-finder. One night Kay Levitz (Hershey) asks him for a favor.She runs a nightclub she inherited from her husband, who was old when shemarried him and dead shortly after. There are people who think she married himto get the club. Now they want the club, but they don't want to marry her. Theywant to muscle her out. Kay thinks maybe Bernzy can give her some advice, helpher out.He is willing to try. He is willing, despite his lifetimepolicy: "Don't get involved." Writer-director Howard Franklin issubtle and touching in the way he modulates the key passages between Pesci andHershey. There is a lot that goes unsaid between them. We can maybe guess fromBernzy's eyes and actions how he feels about her, but he never tells her. Hekeeps his distance. He can maybe hope she feels the same way. She plays itclose.The movie surrounds them with a gallery of colorful nighttimecharacters - vice detectives, rival photographers, mob bosses, broken-downcritics who mourn the bad novels they never wrote. The photography occupies thebeloved territory of film noir: night, wet streets, cars with running boards,dames with low necklines, guys with diamond pinky rings, empty marble newspaperlobbies, guns, highballs, furnished apartments. This was an era when the goodguys smoked cigars and the bad guys smoked cigarettes.One of the best things about the movie is the way it shows ushow seriously Bernzy takes his work. He doesn't talk about it. He does it, withthat cigar stuck in his mug, leading the way with the big, ungainly SpeedGraphic with the glass flashbulbs. In the movie's big scene of a mobassassination, he stares death in the face to get a great picture. He doesn'teven seem especially noble. It's what he bred himself to do. At one point he isasked to turn off the police radio in his car, and he says, "It doesn'tturn off." This is his philosophy of life.The plot of the movie advances the story on the surface, whilethe romance develops in an unacknowledged subterranean fashion.Everything leads up to a moment when Bernzy turns his head awayfrom her and says, "You have no idea what I would have done for you."This is the best kind of love - unrequited. There are moments in "ThePublic Eye" that made me think a little about "Casablanca", especially the earlier scenes when Bogart is still mad at Bergman.Higher praise is not necessary.
