I have no doubt that Balto was a real sled dog, although I havecertain doubts about whether he was able to achieve all of the feats depictedin "Balto," especially tying the dead driver to the sled beforehauling him back to Nome. A dog can't tie a knot worth a darn. I guess you cut a little slack for a movie like this, which isset in the cruel Alaskan winter of 1925, when a diphtheria epidemic broke outin Nome, and the local doctor ran out of antitoxins, and when neither planesnor trains could get through, dog teams were used to bring back the medicineand save lives.Thatmuch we know is true because of the animated movie's live-action prologue andepilogue, showing a monument that was erected in New York's Central Park inhonor of the "indomitable spirit" of the hero dogs. Why thisexpensive sculpture was located in a New York park rather than a Nome parkprobably could inspire another movie, perhaps one directed by Oliver Stone.ButI stray. Most of the movie is animation, telling the story of Balto (voice byKevin Bacon), who is half-wolf and half-dog, and an outcast in Nome, becauseyou can't quite trust a wolf. Balto is in love with a beautiful female dognamed Jenna (Bridget Fonda), who belongs to a cute little girl named Rosy(Juliette Brewer). Balto is brave, loyal and honest, but gets into troublebecause of the evil dog Steele (Jim Cummings), who frames him for stealingsausages.WhenRosy falls ill, Balto wins the race to determine the fastest dog in town, butonce again Steele plays a dirty trick and gets the job of leading the emergencymission. That sets up the movie's most exciting passages, after the missiongets lost and Balto sets off to the rescue.Ofcourse, Balto does not go alone. It is an inviolable rule of all animatedfamily movies that the hero have two, or preferably three, buddies who tagalong for comic relief. Balto's best friend is a Russian goose named Boris(voice by Bob Hoskins with an accent you could bottle) and a couple of polarbears (both voices by Phil Collins, because polar bears all sound alike). Offthey go into the wilderness, surviving avalanches, bitter cold, maraudingbears, falling through the ice, falling over cliffs, and almost being spearedby stalagmites."Balto,"which was produced by Steven Spielberg's animation unit at Universal, doesn'thave the magic of the recent Disney animated films, and not even near the sameappeal to adults. But on its own turf it works well enough: This is a kids'movie, simply told, with lots of excitement and characters you can care about.Myonly question involves Balto's personality. As a half-wolf, he is an outcast inNome, feared by humans and scorned by pedigreed dogs like Steele (althoughJenna and some of the other nice dogs believe in him). Balto has grownaccustomed to slinking away with his tail between his legs, and nursing hisinferiority complex.Butthen there's a big showdown out on the tundra, and I expected Balto at last tocome into his own, stand up for himself, and take on Steele. No such luck.Balto remains the master of the strategic retreat.Iguess this shows you don't have to fight to get what you want, and I guessthat's a valuable lesson, and maybe that's even the message the filmmakers hadin mind. But, hey, Balto man - if ever there was a dog that deserved to have anangry wolf make dog meat out of him, it's Steele. Balto! Attack!
