“Beautiful Thing” tells the story of two teenage boys, neighborsin a London high-rise housing project, who gradually become aware that they arehomosexual. But a funny thing happens: the most interesting scenes involve thecharacters around them, who all but steal the movie. The boys' lives containfew surprises (it is clear from the start what the one big surprise is going tobe), but from the other characters there is one astonishment after another. Theboys are Jamie (Glenn Berry), an introverted, quiet type, and Ste (Scott Neal),an athlete. Jamie becomes aware that he's drawn to Ste, but does nothing aboutit until one night when Ste is beaten (as usual) by his alcoholic father, andJamie's mother takes pity and allows Ste to sleep at their house. Ste and Jamiefairly quickly discover how they feel about each other, and there is a touchingscene where they study a copy of Gay Times magazine, trying to figure out whatthey're supposed to know about homosexuality. (They guess that the word “frottage”means a kind of yogurt.) Their relationship is shown in a fairly simple, sweetway, and we realize that, straight or gay, all teenage first romances have alot in common, including great wonder inspired by raging hormones andidealisms. What is much more interesting is the world they inhabit. The housingproject consists of long rows of flats opening onto balconies, and along thebalconies the neighbors have established an easygoing, friendly community.Wemeet Jamie's mother Sandra (Linda Henry), a barmaid with a big personality.She's loud, jolly, self-confident, good company. Her relationship with her sonseems basically a healthy one, although some might question her hours, and herchoice in boyfriends. Her current squeeze is Tony (Ben Daniels), a leftoverhippie younger than her, who is a good sort, although pot has made him vague.(Meditating on Jamie's situation, he comes up with profundities such as, “Ithink he should just like . . . move towards getting away from all that”).Thedynamo of the balcony is a young black woman named Leah (Tameka Empson), wholives next door and obsesses about the Mamas and the Papas. She wants, indeed,to be the next Mama Cass, and plays her records at top volume at unexpectedhours. “It's not natural,” Sandra says. “A girl her age, into Mama Cass.” Onthe other side lives Ste's dysfunctional family, which also includes a violentolder brother.Theseperipheral characters are the real life of the film. They're quirky, funny, andunpredictable. There is nothing really remarkable about Jamie and Ste; thedirector, Hettie Macdonald, exhausts what she has to say about them by makingthem gay and having them understand and accept that. But Sandra, Leah and Tonyare colorful adults who are verbal (if not articulate) about their beliefs anddesires, and we brighten up every time we see them on the screen.AlthoughI have never been a gay London teenager, I had the feeling that Jamie and Stewere not understood very deeply by the film, and their behavior wasn'tconvincing. After they tentatively accept that they are gay, for example, theygo to a pub advertised in Gay Times and find drag queens putting on a floorshow. (One of the songs is “Hava Nagillah”). Here they realize they are notalone in the universe, and even eventually invite Sandra and Tony to go therewith them.Oh,yeah? To begin with, no London teenager is going to be completely in the darkabout homosexuality. Not in these times. Nor are most 16-year-olds going tofind much amusing in a pub full of older men, many of them in drag, a lot ofthem drunk. Teenagers of any sexuality seek others their age, think30-year-olds are “old,” and might be a little slow to dig middle-aged men doingBarbra Streisand imitations.Thispub is not going to be the answer to Jamie and Ste's search, and yet there aretimes, I swear, when the movie actually seems to think that once you come outof the closet, you head straight for the pub and live there happily for therest of your life. It also contrives a happy ending where Jamie and Ste embraceeach other in public in a commons area at the project, while Mama Cass's voicebounces encouragingly off the walls, and neighbors and strangers beam theirapproval. Also not a likely scenario. The scene where Sandra confronts thetruth about Jamie, on the other hand, is well-written and acted; the movieunderstands her better than her son.“BeautifulThing” is essentially a fantasy, a coming-out fable with about the same depthand insight as a romance novel for teenagers. What makes the movie special andworth recommending are those other characters. I'd like to see a whole movieabout Leah. I was pleased that Sandra finally got her own pub, and I'd like tosee a movie about her managing it. As for Jamie and Ste, they will grow up andbecome more complicated, better-informed and less one-dimensional, and the daywill come when they will look at a movie like this, smile, and shake theirheads in amusement and disbelief.
