The revision of Malcolm's image has been a long time coming, butin recent years a new Malcolm has emerged, one who began as a single-mindedzealot but by the end of his life, after a visit to Mecca, had undergone atransformation into a leader with a much wider vision, who preached that trueIslam drew no color line. Spike Lee's 1992 film "Malcolm X" furtheredthis process, and today Malcolm X's death is widely considered a lostopportunity for America, instead of a historical footnote to the other threefamous deaths. Assassinationtheorists have picked clean the bones of the John F. Kennedy and Martin LutherKing murders. With Malcolm, although there has long been a feeling that thefull truth was not known, there was never the same intensity of curiosity. Nowa new documentary named "Brother Minister" reopens the case of hisassassination, and makes compelling claims that all but one of his real killerswent free.Thefilm, directed by Jack Baxter and written by Baxter with Lee's researcher JefriAalmuhammed and Joan Claire Chabriel, traces the steps by which Malcolm X wentfrom being the trusted lieutenant of Nation of Islam founder Elijah Muhammad tohis most hated enemy.Itcontains eyewitness testimony from many of those who were there when he waskilled in the Audubon Ballroom in New York City on Feb. 21, 1965 - includingundercover New York policeman Gene Roberts. It talks to many others - W. DeenMohammed, Elijah's son; Thomas Johnson, who served 20 years for the killing butprotested his innocence; retired New York FBI chief James Fox; attorney WilliamKunstler, who tried to reopen the case, and Benjamin 2X Karim, who was standingnext to Malcolm when he died.Their evidence is, of course, contradictory and sometimesconfusing. But out of it emerges a composite picture of a day on which Malcolmseemed almost doomed to die. In the months preceding his death, his house wasfirebombed, and there were threats to his life in Nation of Islam newspapers.On the day of his death, there was inadequate or (some say) no security at theAudubon Ballroom. His bodyguards were mysteriously replaced with another groupjust before he appeared on the stage. And the conspiracy continued with thecharging of Thomas Hayer and two other men that Hayer insisted had nothing todo with it.Whodid? It was after viewing this film that Betty Shabazz, Malcolm's widow, wenton television last year to charge that Louis Farrakhan, current leader of theNation of Islam, was involved. But the film does not name Farrakhan; it namesfour members of the Nation's New Jersey mosque as the additional trigger men,but then widens the net to show an informal process that may also have involved"disinformation squads" of the FBI.Quotingfrom recently declassified FBI documents, the film argues that the FBI wasalarmed by Malcolm's rise to influence, and especially by his post-Mecca movetoward the political center, where he was seen as a potentially dangerous,charismatic leader. The FBI forged letters to spread the seeds of dissent amongblack Islamic groups, the film says, including one letter that Elijah Muhammadthought was from Malcolm himself. It was a shadowy process, according to BabaZak A. Kondo, author of Unraveling the Assassination of Malcolm X and one ofthe film's chief sources, who says the disinformation effort "put out acertain energy, and the (Nation of Islam private security force) Fruit of Islampicked up on that energy." In other words, according to the noted blackhistorian John Henrik Clarke, although his former Black Muslim allies "mayhave killed him, the direction came from outside." And the movie remainsinevitably vague about where that direction came from. It does, however, containfascinating documentary footage of Malcolm X himself, which fleshes out theevents that Spike Lee dramatized in his film. In "Malcolm X," Malcolmgrows disillusioned about his former leader's personal life. In "BrotherMinister," we see him predicting an attempt on his own life, and saying,"They are afraid I will tell what I know, that Elijah is the father ofeight children by six different teenage girls...." Whether or not that wasthe motive, Malcolm X was dead within days. There is a chilling coda. In 1993,Farrakhan, now leader of the Nation of Islam, stung by criticism inspired bySpike Lee's film, addressed a rally that was supposedly closed to the media. Invideo footage obtained by Baxter, he addresses rhetorical remarks to his whiteaccusers: "Did you make Malcolm? Did you clean up Malcolm? Did you putMalcolm out before the world? Was Malcolm your traitor, or was he ours? And ifwe dealt with him like a nation deals with a traitor, what the hell business isit of yours?" "Brother Minister" is probably not the last wordon the death of Malcolm X. It is more like a brave initial effort to penetratethe thicket of rumors, accusations, evidence and testimony that has grown uparound the event. There are times when Baxter offers so much evidence, oftencontradictory, that we are not sure exactly what point he is making. But thefilm offers an invaluable opportunity to hear the surviving witnesses,participants and experts speak in their own words, and eventually an overallpicture emerges: In the words of Benjamin Karim, Malcolm's legacy endures, andthose who killed him "created what they were trying to destroy."
