The words “Disney” and “animation” fit together so firmly in thepublic mind that a feature-length cartoon from any other studio has toughgoing. If it's not Disney, somehow parents don't feel automatically compelledto load up the family van and head for the multiplex. Warner Bros. has been trying to change that perception, and its “SpaceJam,” starring Michael Jordan and Bugs Bunny, was a box-office hit, even thoughit didn't break through the magic $100 million domestic box-office ceiling. Nowthe studio is back again, with “Cats Don't Dance,” a cute animated musicalabout Danny the Song and Dance Cat, from Kokomo, Ind., who hops on a bus toHollywood in search of stardom, circa 1939.The movie lacks the strong plotting and vividly definedcharacters typical of Disney movies, and it doesn't start with the death of oneor more parents, which seems more or less obligatory in the genre. It plays,indeed, more like an animated version of an old Hollywood musical (there areelements of “Singin' in the Rain,” and the late Gene Kelly is credited with thefilm's choreography).The opening is right out of countless show-biz tales. Danny(voice by Scott Bakula) arrives in Hollywood with a seven-day plan that startswith getting an agent and ends with getting the girl. He quickly discovers thehard facts of life: Animal actors aren't much in demand, and humans get all thebest jobs.He's lucky to land a one-liner (“Meow”) in a new musical byDarla Dimple (voice by Ashley Peldon), legendary heroine of Mammoth Studios,where the formula for a box-office hit is “Simple! It's Dimple!” He works themeow up into an entire routine and is in the process of stealing the show whenan ominous presence looms high above him: Max, Darla's butler (lifted here,accent and all, from Erich von Stroheim in “Sunset Boulevard”).Danny makes some new friends, including Woolie (voice by JohnRhys-Davies), the elephant who serves as Mammoth's mascot and spends hisoff-hours playing piano in the gypsy caravan that doubles as his home. (There'snice animation in a scene where his slightest movement causes his home totremble alarmingly.) And he falls in love with Sawyer (voice by Jasmine Guy,songs by Natalie Cole), a veteran feline actress. But after Max gets him allbut blacklisted in Hollywood, he grows disheartened and starts to go backhome--only to change his mind, return and star in a triumphant impromptuproduction number at the premiere of Darla's new movie. Even the dreaded mogulL. B. Mammoth (voice by George Kennedy) is won over.This scene, which mirrors “Singin' in the Rain” by making a newstar at the cost of an older one, is well-handled with a lot of energy. AndMark Dindal (“The Rocketeer”), the film's director, creates a fresh look forthe animation: not Disney, and not Looney Tunes, but a touch of Betty Boop andMax Fleischer.“Cats Don't Dance” is not compelling and it's not abreakthrough, but on its own terms, it works well. Whether this will appeal tokids is debatable; the story involves a time and a subject they're not muchinterested in. But the songs by Randy Newman are catchy, the look is bright,the spirits are high and fans of Hollywood's golden age might find it engaging.Note: The movie's curtain-raiser is “Pullet Surprise” (say itout loud), a brand-new six-minute cartoon produced by the legendary animatorChuck Jones and starring Foghorn Leghorn.
