“Fish been very good to me,” says Joe, early in “Caught.” Heruns a fish market in Jersey City and has a proud policy: “Any customer finds abone, I give them their money back, plus a quarter.” Joe's life is full becausehe loves fish (“Fish are his life,” his wife says, with an irony that Joedoesn't pick up on). This looks like the setup for a story of proletarianbliss, but in fact “Caught” is the most carnal of recent movies, a film thatreminds us how movies used to take sex seriously, instead of using it as anexcuse for muscular choreography. Formany years Joe (Edward James Olmos) and his wife Betty (Maria Conchita Alonso)have run their fish store on a street of other small shops.Theirmarriage would be perfect if only Joe liked sex more, and Betty liked fishmore. Their only son, Danny (Steven Schub), has moved to Hollywood to seek workas a standup comic, and sends back videos of his act, which seems like therantings of a dangerous lunatic, although his mother proudly calls him “thenext Robin Williams.” Into their shop one day steps a young man on the run fromthe police.Hisname is Nick (Arie Verveen), and he's not a criminal, just a kid down on hisluck. Joe and Betty take pity on him, invite him home for dinner, andeventually offer him a job. The pay isn't great but the deal includes room andboard, and Nick is given Danny's old room in the cramped flat where the familylives.Ina sense, Nick is the son Joe and Betty wanted and deserved. The absent Danny isa drugged-out creep who lies “my agent has Letterman and `Saturday Night Live'fighting over me.” But Nick is grateful, friendly, learns fast, and loves thesame things Joe and Betty love: Fish, and sex. With fish it is a slowerprocess, but Joe teaches him patiently, and soon he can bone a chubb in underfive minutes, which is “the mark of a fish man.” Sharing the same cramped spacewith Betty, Nick becomes aware of her as a woman. This is a remarkably easything to do when Betty is played by Maria Conchita Alonso, one of the rareactresses who seems to think sex is an occasion to laugh and be grateful--insteadof a grim showdown with Darwinian management and marketing overtones. Becauseboth Betty and Nick care for Joe, they do not want to cheat, but a deep currentof passion grows between them, and after their first illicit lovemaking theybecome helpless in the face of their obsession, snatching stolen moments whilein constant danger of being discovered by Joe.Oneof the things that makes “Caught” intriguing is that we don't want them to bediscovered--because we care for Joe. As played by Olmos, he is a good man, alittle too single-minded, who does not deserve to be hurt. Nick and Betty knowthis, too. “I wish we could tell him--show him--so he could see how wonderfulit is,” Betty says.Thesituation reaches a crisis when the obnoxious Danny returns from Los Angeleswith his wife and child. Despite his boasts, he has no prospects and a dimfuture; he uses a lot of dope and focuses on cruel one-liners, a lot of themaimed at Nick. It takes Danny little time to figure out what's going on betweenhis mother and the new shop assistant, and there is a shocking moment at apicnic when he tricks his mother, who uses her toes to caress her son's legunder the table, thinking it is Nick's.“Caught”is not the kind of movie we ordinarily expect from Robert M. Young, a directorwhose films run toward political themes with progressive overtones (his creditsinclude “The Ballad of Gregorio Cortez,” “Short Eyes,” “Dominick and Eugene”and “Triumph of the Spirit”). It's more classic in its undertones; we arereminded of Oedipus. But there is a special twist to the story, since thevillain is the real son, while the symbolic son is more the victim of theirresistible attraction that grows up between himself and Betty, and the fatheris an innocent bystander. These confused lines of affection and loyalty makefor an explosive and complicated crisis which is surprising in its form and itsshocking outcome.Watchingthe movie has the fascination of watching a traffic accident; we know there isgoing to be a crash, cannot stop it, and cannot look away. But Young and hisactors are able to lead us to the crash through a process that makes us careabout the people it happens to. And they are fearless in showing us theconsequences of uncontrolled lust.WhenI think of sex in recent movies, I think of a joyless, calculated display ofcommercialized images, as in such movies as “Striptease,” “Showgirls” and allof those yuppie dramas where men are destroyed by mantis-like femaleexecutives. “Caught” is a throwback to a time when the movies thought about sexmore simply, as something that people wanted so much that sometimes itoverwhelmed their better senses. And that strong elemental power, coursingunder the surface of the story, gives it a strength that elevates melodramaalmost to tragedy.
