“Ed's Next Move,” a sweet and quietly funny love story, is thekind of movie that seems to be meandering, and then it sneaks up on you. Itbegins as the story of a museum-quality nerd: a rice geneticist from Wisconsinwho is so organized in his mid-20s that he even has his cemetery plot boughtand paid for. He moves to New York, and swims into the orbit of a young singerwho does Liz Phair-type songs about the irony of banality. They kiss. Bythe time they kiss, I wanted them to kiss. That's how I realized the movie wasworking. In some of the earlier passages I'd been unconvinced, but the moviebuilds quietly but very surely toward a point at which we like these characters,we worry about them and (always the fatal step) we recognize elements ofourselves.Themovie stars Matt Ross as Eddie Brodsky, who knows a lot about rice but willnever, at his present rate of progress, get any thrown at him at a church door.Callie Thorne is Lee Nicol, a New Yorker who regards Wisconsin as a wordassociation test for which the answer is “cheese.” Kevin Carroll plays Ray,Eddie's first roommate, a ladies' man who gives him advice about women and theways of the world. Ed complains, “You allow for things I can't even pronounce.”It goes without saying that Ed and Ray spend a lot of time sitting in the kindsof diners that have Formica countertops and waitresses who write orders down ongreen Guest Checks. All single men in the movies hold most of theirconversations in diners, maybe because putting them across a booth from oneanother is a perfect way to explain a dialogue scene in which the faces areclose enough for a two-shot without anybody getting any funny ideas. Just in recentweeks, I've witnessed heartfelt diner discussions between single men in “Swingers”and “Things to Do in Denver When You're Dead,” and then of course there was themother of all Guys in Diners Scenes, in “Heat.” Ed and Ray discuss topics suchas the origin of “nitty gritty” and the types of Arctic fauna. The diner is runby a friendly Jewish woman who introduces Ed to such exotic foods as bagels andborscht; one of the film's underlying themes is the way the Wisconsin kidlearns the ropes in the big city.Onething he needs to know more about is the mind of a woman. His telephoneconversations with Lee sound like they were memorized in a foreign language.She looks at him sometimes as if he's a pod person. On their first date, Edkills some mice and she leaves and he is deeply despondent, and Ray explains, “Let'sjust say first dates go better when nothing dies.” The movie was written anddirected by John Walsh, who told a Toronto Film Festival crowd he financed itwith credit cards after a friend tipped him off about lots of extra 35-mm.stock left over from the filming of “Smoke.” (That film's director, Wayne Wang,used very long takes, so if an actor lost it early in a scene, there were goodamounts of unexposed film remaining on the reel.) The movie doesn't betray itslow-budget origins. It looks as good as it needs to, and sounds wonderful;Walsh has a gift for dialogue. We get the kinds of lines new lovers use whenthey are at a loss to explain their chemistry: “If Raymond Carver and HoagyCarmichael had gotten together, they would have sounded like us.” And quiet,funny little exchanges (“You smell like cookies.” “It's a perfume that I mademyself.”).“Ed'sNext Move” is a comedy, not a docudrama, and yet it's more accurate about romancethan many more serious movies. For one thing, it is driven by dialogue andsocial uncertainty, rather than by testosterone. For every romance that beginswith a Mickey Rourke type slamming a Kim Basinger type up against an alley wallin the rain, there are a thousand, I suppose, that begin when your cat throwsup a fur ball in the lap of the woman you're trying to impress.
