“Emma” is the fourth recent version of an Austen novel, after “Persuasion,”“Sense and Sensibility” and the TV adaptation of “Pride and Prejudice.” (As abonus, the Beverly Hills comedy “Clueless” was based on the same story.) It isnot about very much--about the romantic intrigues of a small group of peoplewho will all more or less have to marry one another sooner or later, if theyhaven't already. Eitheryou are in sympathy with this material or you are not. I had to smile at anundergraduate's review of the movie, posted on the Internet, which complainsthat “a parade of 15 or 20 or 8 billion supporting characters waltzes throughthe scenes. Each is called Mister or Miss or Mrs. Something, and each of themlooks and acts exactly the same (obnoxious).” I am not sure you can lookobnoxious, but never mind. It may be that young people in a permissive age donot have sympathy for a movie in which a busybody matchmaker spends her daystrying to pair off unwilling candidates for matrimony. Yet in its high spiritsand wicked good humor, “Emma” is a delightful film--second only to “Persuasion”among the modern Austen movies, and funnier, if not so insightful.GwynethPaltrow sparkles in the title role, as young Miss Woodhouse, who wants to playGod in her own little patch of England. You can see her eyes working the room,speculating on whose lives she can improve. She takes as a project HarrietSmith (Toni Collette), a respectable young woman of imperfect pedigree,insisting that she marry the Rev. Elton (Alan Cumming). Miss Smith would muchsooner marry a local farmer, but Emma won't hear of it. When the poor farmersends Miss Smith a letter of proposal, she shows it to Emma, who sniffs, “It isa good letter. One of his sisters must have helped him.” Miss Smith is souncertain of herself that she turns down the farmer, only to discover that theReverend doesn't love her--he loves Miss Woodhouse (“I have never cared forMiss Smith,” he tells Emma, “except as your friend”). This should be a lessonfor Emma, but she'll need more than one.Storieslike this are about manners, nuance and the way that one's natural charactertugs against the strict laws of society. In a time when most people traveledlittle and diversion was largely limited to local parties, three-volume novelsand church services, gossip was the great pastime. Local characters were prizedbecause they gave you someone to talk about, and “Emma” has its share, mostdelightfully Mrs. Elton (Juliet Stevenson), who praises herself incessantly byquoting others (of her musical talent, she says, “I myself don't call it great.I only know that my friends call it so”).Otherlocal color is provided by Miss Bates and her deaf mother, Mrs. Bates. (Theyare played by Sophie Thompson and Phyllida Law, who are Emma Thompson's sisterand mother.) Miss Bates says everything three times and Mrs. Bates never hearsit, and when Emma is unforgivably rude to poor Miss Bates it is the upright Mr.Knightley (Jeremy Northam), her brother-in-law, who dresses her down, givingher a stern lecture on her responsibilities under the class system.Emmathinks of Knightley as a brother. She is interested in the Reverend not at all.There is a dashing young bachelor in the neighborhood named Frank Churchill(Ewan McGregor) who seems cast as her beau (he rescues her when her carriagegets mired in the river, and again when she is threatened by gypsies). But hehas other plans, too, and in the fullness of time Austen sees that everyonegets what they deserve, or in Emma's case perhaps rather more.
