It helps to have a short attention span while watching “Eraser,”the new Arnold Schwarzenegger picture. Consider, for example, a sequence latein the film, where Arnold is shot through the left shoulder. He grabs hisshoulder and grimaces. From the bullet's point of entry, we guess his shoulderbone is broken and there is a lot of muscle damage. Immediately afterward,Arnold is in a fight to the death with the villain (James Caan) on top of ashipping container that has been lifted high in the air by a crane. The heroine(Vanessa Williams) is also on the container, and she falls off. But Arnold isable to grab her out of the air. He holds her with his right hand, and supportsthe weight of both of them with his left hand and arm. That's a neat trickafter a bullet has shattered your shoulder. But wait. If you think way back tothe movie's second big action sequence, near the beginning of the film, Arnoldand Vanessa are the targets of a nail bomb, which explodes, driving a spikecompletely through Arnold's right hand--the one he later holds Williams with. Aguy like that, he could play basketball on bad ankles for weeks. How does he doit? I guess he has plumb forgotten the spike through his hand. There have beena lot of distractions, like being attacked by alligators at the New York CityZoo, and falling out of an airplane without his parachute, and shooting at aBoeing 727 with a handgun. Arnold is amazingly serene under this duress. Afterhe shoots the alligator through the head, he tells it, “You’re luggage!” Theplot of “Eraser” involves Vanessa Williams as Lee Cullen, an employee of adefense contractor who stumbles across evidence that a secret cabal inside theU.S. government is illegally exporting advanced weapons systems. In particular,they're selling the Rail Gun. What is a Rail Gun? Allow the movie's director,Charles Russell, to explain: “Rail guns are hyper-velocity weapons that shootaluminum or clay rounds at just below the speed of light.” Uh huh. Just belowthe speed of light? Which is 186,282 miles a second? What happens to aluminumand clay rounds shot at that speed? They don’t pulverize or anything, do they?That muzzle velocity doesn't cause overheating or anything, I suppose? At leastthere's no recoil when the bullets leave the guns at just below the speed oflight. I know that because at one point Arnold holds a Rail Gun in each hand(including the injured right one) and fires them simultaneously. What isamazing is that Charles Russell wants us to believe these guns are plausible. “Theseguns,” he elaborates in the press notes, “represent a whole new technology inweaponry that is still in its infancy, though a large-scale version exists inlimited numbers on battleships and tanks. Theyhave incredible range. They can pierce three-foot-thick cement walls and thenknock a canary off a tin can with absolute accuracy.” If I read this correctly,he is talking here about the battleship model.Mycuriosity is awakened. To hell with the secret government plot--I want toseethe U.S. Navy shooting clay bullets at just beneath the speed of light throughthree-foot cement walls at canaries. And I want to stay for the credits: “Nocanaries were harmed during the filming of this motion picture.” But I digress.“Eraser” is actually good action fun, with spectacular stunts and specialeffects (I liked the sequence where Arnold shoots it out with the Boeing 727)and high energy. Arnold plays his usual heroic character, an ace operative inthe federal Witness Protection Program, and Vanessa Williams is a good sport,running and jumping and fighting and shooting and kicking and screaming andbeing tied to chairs and smuggling computer discs and looking great. There isfun, too, when Arnold contacts an old friend named Johnny C (Robert Pastorelli)from the Witness Protection Program. Johnny is an ex-Mafia guy, now working ina drag bar. When Arnold finds out the illegal arms are being shipped from dockscontrolled by the union, Johnny goes to his uncle, Tony Two Toes, who looksunkindly on anybody moving anything through the docks without union sanction.Soon Johnny, Tony Two Toes and other Mafioso are spying on a Russian shipthat's being loaded. They have the following conversation: Tony Two Toes: Thosedirty commies! Underling: They're not commies any more. They're a federation ofindependent liberated states. Tony: Don't make me hurt you, Mikey. “Eraser” ismore or less what you expect, two hours of mindless nonstop high-tech action,with preposterous situations, a body count in the dozens, and Arnoldintroducing a new trademark line of dialogue (it's supposed to be “Trust me,”but I think “You're luggage” will win on points). Thinking back over the film,I can only praise the director's restraint in leaving out the canary.
