Richard Feynman, who won the Nobel Prize for physics in 1965,was one of the most interesting men our century has produced. As a very youngman, he did theoretical work at Los Alamos on the project to develop an atomicbomb. In 1960, he gave a speech so famous it is known simply as “Feynman'sTalk,” in which he described a new science of nanotechnology--the manipulationof very, very small things. Notonly was it possible to write the complete contents of the EncyclopediaBritannica on the head of a needle, he said, but the contents of every bookever written could be stored in a space the size of a dust mote. (This speechhelped point the way to the tiny microprocessors on silicon chips that mademodern computers possible.) Near the end of his life, conducting a simpleexperiment with a glass of ice water, he solved the mystery of the Challengerspace shuttle disaster. He died in 1988.Atfirst I was disappointed that “Infinity,” the new film based on his earlyyears, pays relatively little attention to Feynman's science. It follows an oldtradition: Movies about great men tend to concentrate on the time when theywere young and in love, rather than when they were middle-aged and doing theirmost important work. (It is a great relief when the subject, like Mozart, dieswhile still young.) “Infinity” follows Feynman (Matthew Broderick) from thelate 1930s until the mid-1940s, a time during which he met and courted hisfirst wife, Arline Greenbaum (Patricia Arquette). He was born brilliant and wasnot shy to admit it; on one of his first dates with Arline, he bets a Chinesemerchant that he can solve problems in his head faster than the man can use hisabacus.Agraduate of MIT, now studying at Princeton, Feynman long has been in love withArline. Marriage, they thought, could wait--and would have to, because they hadno money. Then two things changed all that. Feynman was offered a job in thetop-secret research project at Los Alamos, and Arline became seriously ill withtuberculosis.Inthose days TB was a hushed-up illness; patients went to sanitariums to recover,placing their lives on hold. In the film, Feynman and his love are not surethey have time to spare. She may die. And he knows as well as anyone that thedeveloping war may bring untold disaster. Over his parents' objections, theyget married despite her illness. Feynman leaves for New Mexico and at the firstopportunity sends for Arline, who becomes a patient in an Albuquerque hospital.Broderickand Arquette have a sweet, unforced chemistry as the young couple, who trytheir best to lead normal lives in an abnormal situation (in one scene, theybarbecue steaks on a grill on the front lawn of the hospital). For Feynman,almost everything is an experiment; he pounces around her hospital room,testing the limits of the human nose. (His theory: We could sniff out things alot better if we paid more attention to the process.) The project at Los Alamostakes on a shadowy unreality as a backdrop to their married life. I vividlyremember the great documentary “The Day After Trinity,” about the developmentof the bomb, and in the backgrounds of some shots in “Infinity,” I could guesswhat was happening in the real world of the Manhattan Project. But the film,directed by Broderick and written by his mother, Patricia, is more concernedwith their inner landscapes.Eventuallythe love story won me over. I could see that “Infinity” was not going to beabout Feynman's science but about his heart, but then the film had neverpromised to be anything else. Maybe the problems of these two small peopledidn't amount to a hill of beans in the crazy world they were living in--butthey mattered to Richard and Arline, and at the center of the story is the factthat a brilliant scientist who can figure out almost anything can't make theslightest dent in the ultimate reality of death.“Infinity”is a sweet story about smart people, and depends for its effect on thebittersweet knowledge that their happiness is transitory. There are momentswhen they seem to sense some higher power, as when they hold a picnic in akiva--one of the dwellings hewn out of rock faces by early cliff-dwelling Indians--andothers when sorrow strikes, as when Richard buries his face in Arline's clothesto remember her powder and perfume. It is a small story, and a touching one.
