History will record the greatness of Michael Collins,” the Irishpresident and patriot Eamon De Valera said as an old man in 1966, “and it willbe recorded at my expense.” Yes, and perhaps justly so, but even Dev couldhardly have imagined this film biography of Collins, which portrays De Valeraas a weak, mannered, sniveling prima donna whose grandstanding led to decadesof unnecessary bloodshed in, and over, Ireland. “MichaelCollins” paints a heroic picture of the Irish Republican Army's inspiredstrategist and military leader, who fought the British Empire to a standstilland invented the techniques of urban guerrilla warfare that shapedrevolutionary struggles all over the world. Played by Liam Neeson in a performancecharged with zest and conviction, Collins comes across as a clear-sightedinnovator who took the IRA as far as it could reasonably hope to go, and thensigned a treaty with the British that was, he argued “the best we can hope forat this moment in time.” The treaty established an Irish Free State, but itpreserved the division of Ireland into north and south, and it fell short ofthe independent republic the IRA had been fighting for. Collins felt thatadditional negotiations over a period of years could eventually produce thosegains; he and his comrades were weary of bloodshed.ButDe Valera (played with shifty conceit by Alan Rickman) refused to support thetreaty, and his decision led to an Irish civil war and, indirectly, to theassassination of Collins. And today IRA bomb blasts still rock London, and thepeace that Collins hoped for has come only from time to time.WasDe Valera (who led Ireland in various offices for most of the years between1932 and 1973) really responsible for all these tragic consequences? Some argueso, but others will find that “Michael Collins,” in need of an Irish villain tobalance the British enemy and explain the death of Collins, makes Dev into aweaker and more devious man than he was. The film even implies, without quitesaying so, that Dev was aware of, or at least not adverse to, the plot againstCollins.Suchquestions will be much debated in Ireland, where the minutiae of IRA politicsand strategy are a cottage industry. For audiences elsewhere in the world, thefacts in “Michael Collins” will be less interesting than the characters and themyths, and on that basis Neil Jordan's movie functions well, giving us a folkhero known throughout Ireland as “The Big Fella,” who even with a price of10,000 pounds on his head was able to bicycle through Dublin with impunity.Partlythat was because no one knew, until he went to London to negotiate the peacetreaty, quite what Michael Collins looked like. There is a scene in the moviewhere Collins audaciously presents himself at midnight to British Armyheadquarters, says he is an informer, gains entrance, and works with an insider(Stephen Rea) to copy secret information on British security forces.Thefilm, which has the look and feel of authenticity, opens with a one-sidedBritish victory over IRA troops that tried to occupy Dublin's main post office.Collins sees, correctly, that if the IRA adopts conventional tactics, it willbe destroyed by the British troops, and so he argues for a strategy in whichIRA men melt into the crowds, are indistinguishable from civilians, anddisappear after sudden strikes. This approach is good enough to force theBritish to the negotiating table (despite the intransigence of WinstonChurchill), even though De Valera continues to argue for more conventionalmethods; he seems to feel diminished by not leading a proper-looking army.Themovie moves confidently when it focuses on Collins and his best friend andco-strategist Harry Boland (Aidan Quinn). But it falters with the unnecessary characterof Kitty Kiernan (Julia Roberts), who is in love with both men, and they withher. “I was ahead by a length,” Harry tells her in one scene. “Now where am I?”She shakes her head: “It's not a race, Harry. You without him...him withoutyou...I can't imagine it.” The movie uses the scenes with Kitty to provideobligatory romantic interludes between war and strategy, but even though Kittywas a historical character, we never feel the scenes are necessary; theyfunction as a sop to the audience, not as additional drama.Collins,who died at 31, was arguably the key figure in the struggles that led to theseparation of Ireland and Britain. He was also, on the basis of this film, aman able to use violence without becoming intoxicated by it. The film arguesthat if he had prevailed Ireland might eventually have been united, and manylives might have been saved. We will never know. But De Valera was right.History has judged Collins at his expense.
