No matter how well we eventually come to understand our parents,our deepest feelings about them are formed at a time when we are young and haveincomplete information. “One True Thing” is about a daughter who grows upadmiring her father and harboring doubts about her mother, and finds out shedoesn't know as much about either one as she thinks she does. The movie is based on the 1995 novel by Anna Quindlen about aNew York magazine writer whose father is “Mr. American Literature” and whosemother seems to have been shaped by the same forces that generated MarthaStewart's hallucinations. Ellen (Renee Zellweger) is bright and pretty but witha subtle wounded look: She has that way of signaling that she's been hurt andexpects to be hurt again.She comes home to upstate New York for a surprise birthday partyfor her father, a professor named George (William Hurt), and is not surprisedto see her mother, Kate (Meryl Streep), prancing around the house dressed likeDorothy in “The Wizard of Oz.” Yes, it's a costume party, but Kate is the kindof woman who can find costumes like that right in her own closet. EventuallyEllen gets a chance to ask her dad about her latest magazine article, which hehas read and, “writer to writer,” thinks should be “more muscular.” Later hemuses, “When I was 20 and working at the New Yorker, I would spend a whole dayworking on a single sentence.” That's the kind of statement that deserves pityrather than respect; if it is true, then to meet his deadlines he must have hadto dash off his other sentences in heedless haste. Ellen should be able to feela certain contempt for her father for even using such a ploy, but she isblinded by his tweeds, his National Book Award, his seminars, his whole edificeof importance. He thinks he's a big shot, and she buys it.Ellen's hurt, we see, comes because her father, whom sheadmires, does not sufficiently show his love for her--while her mother, of whomshe disapproves, has a love that is therefore unwelcome. All of this begins tomatter in the next months, as it develops that Kate has cancer, and George wantshis daughter to move back home and take care of her.But ... I have a career, Ellen argues. “You can work as afree-lancer from home,” the professor says, clearly not convinced that whateverhis daughter has can be described as a career. He, of course, is too busy withmidterms to take care of Kate. The family's younger brother, Brian (Tom EverettScott), must stay in school. Yes, a nurse could be hired, but the professordoesn't want a nurse poking around the house and disturbing his routine. Kate herselfdoesn't want Ellen to stay, but wasn't consulted (by her husband or herdaughter) about the decision.As autumn winds down into winter, Ellen coexists in the housewith a mother who is clearly demented in the area of domestic activities. Shebelongs to a local group named the Minnies, who decorate Christmas trees withthe fury of beavers rebuilding a dam. The luncheon meetings of the Minniescould be photographed for layouts in food magazines, and of course the Minniescook everything themselves. When Ellen breaks a piece of Kate's china, Kateasks her to save the pieces because she can use them in her mosaic table. Ellenfinally tells Kate she thinks the Minnies are like a cult group.George, on the other hand, throws his daughter a bone; he asksher to write an introduction to his collected essays. She is flattered,although a little wounded that he then immediately asks her, in more or lessthe same spirit, to launder some shirts.As winter unfolds and Kate's illness grows more severe, Ellenbegins to suspect things about her father, and her mother observes this andfinally tells her: “There's nothing that you know about your father that Idon't know--and better.” And we see that the buried story of the movie is thehurt Kate has borne all these years over the way her daughter's love wasquietly directed away from her.It is the craftsmanship that elevates “One True Thing” above thelevel of a soaper. The director, Carl Franklin (“One False Move”), goes not forbig melodramatic revelations but for the accumulation of emotional investments.Hurt and Streep are so well cast they're able to overcome the generic naturesof their roles and make them particular people. And Renee Zellweger, as Streepobserved at the Telluride Film Festival, is able to create a place for herselfand work inside it, not acting so much as fiercely possessing her character.The movie's lesson is that we go through life telling ourselves a story aboutour childhood and our parents, but we are the authors of that story, and it isless fact than fiction.
