The opening titles of “Phenomenon” plant a sly idea that the filmdoes nothing to discourage. We see the star-filled sky, and then the letters ofthe title settle into place with a subtle whoosh. We pick up “Close Encounters”vibes. Not long after, the film's hero walks out under the stars and isstartled to see some kind of a weird white light, which zaps him from theheavens. Has he been touched by a UFO? Maybe. The hero is George Malley (John Travolta),a genial garage mechanic, of average intelligence, well liked in his smallCalifornia town. After the visitation from the sky, he begins to get smarter. Alot smarter. He starts taking out six books a day from the local library andfiguring out things that had previously been beyond him. He's able to learn a foreignlanguage by riffling through a textbook. This is not the George people know. Itis the lament of “Phenomenon” that people do not like the unexpected. They wantGeorge to continue to be George, no more, no less, so that he continues to fillthe same predictable place in their lives. A brilliant new George, winning atchess, predicting earthquakes, picking up strange vibes, is disturbing. “Whatis going on, George?” asks Lace (Kyra Sedgwick), the pretty divorced womanGeorge would like to be dating. “I need the simple truth!” She has thethankless role of the woman who demands an explanation that the audience knowsis impossible to give: “I just asked you for one thing, George, and youcouldn't handle it!” It's about the only thing George can't handle; matters ofthe heart are just as difficult to solve when you're a genius. The only peoplein town who can easily accept the new George are Doc (Robert Duvall), whoconsiders him like a son, and Nate (Forest Whitaker), his best friend. Withthem, George is able to share his enthusiasm for the daily cascade ofdiscoveries. This is a good role for Travolta, who has an underlying sweetnessand enthusiasm that is well used here. There's not an ounce of circumspection inhis character, and when he gets his unexpected gift, he wants to share it. Hecontacts scientists and universities, and is startled when the FBI turns up inits obligatory role as paranoid sniffer after suspicious behavior (his interviewwith a federal agent is a small gem). We know the general outlines of the storybefore, having been through somewhat similar territory with Cliff Robertson's “Charly”(1968).Although Charly was retarded and George is average, they areboth transformed through their blooming intelligence, and then in the thirdact, something happens that is not foreseen. I will not reveal what that is,except to say that the film will leave you with questions that it does notquite resolve. Maybe that’s the best thing. We know what happened to George,but not precisely why, and who's to say if a UFO was involved or not? The heartof the story is in George's character and his relationship with Lace (who,apart from her obligatory demands for an explanation, is a good andunderstanding woman). The film is essentially a good-hearted story about therhythms of small-town life and the meaning of friendship, and if George's giftis a mystery even to him, at least it inspires a lot of conversation. Like manysmall towns (or movies set in small towns), this one has a bar where the localsprovide a chorus for all of the action, and after George begins spinningpaperclips in mid-air and breaking mirrors, they have the material for many a longbeery discussion. “Phenomenon” could have been more, I think. It might have pushedthe edges of its story a little harder, and found out things that would be morechallenging, or threatening, to George and the world he lives in. But that's notwhat it's about. It's about change, acceptance and love, and it rounds thosethree bases very nicely, even if it never quite gets to home.
