“Pocahontas" is the best-looking of the modern Disneyanimated features, and one of the more thoughtful: It is about real issues,even if it treats them with naive idealism. In its view, Native Americans livedin peaceful harmony with nature until European settlers came, bringing guns andecological destruction. The Europeans, puffed up with their notions ofcivilization, did not realize how much they had to learn from the Indians. Midwaythrough the film, after Captain John Smith (voiced by Mel Gibson) hasthoughtlessly dismissed the ideas of the young Indian woman he loves,Pocahontas asks: "If the savage one is me, how can there be so much youdon't know?" Then follows a musical sequence during which Pocahontas(Irene Bedard) takes Smith on a whirlwind tour of the forest. Because this is aDisney picture, the animals are of course all friends of the Indian maiden, whosnatches a cute cub away from a mother bear - something that even my ownlimited woodcraft suggests is not prudent.Themessage of "Pocahontas" is that arriving settlers despoiled theforests and imposed their own version of civilization, whether or not it waswanted. Governor Ratcliffe (David Ogden Stiers), the blustering leader of theVirginia Company, is shown gleefully using cannons to level forests. And whenthe settlers open fire on the Indians, they retaliate by capturing John Smithand then prepare to execute him. Only Pocahontas, who can empathize with bothsides, can save the day."Pocahontas"is based on myth, not history. In real life, Pocahontas was 11 or 12 when shefirst met John Smith (who claimed in his journals that his life was saved noless than three times by women who loved him). The Englishman she married wasJohn Rolfe. She did indeed get to go to England, where she was feted as aprincess.Shedied in Europe, at about age 21. The son she had with Rolfe became one of therichest of early American settlers, and his descendants still thrive.Havingled one of the most interesting lives imaginable, Pocahontas serves here moreas a simplified symbol, an Indian maid who falls in love with a dashing blondhero, saves his life, and brings about a peace between her people and theEuropean visitors.Thedramatic challenge in the movie (as it is in "The Little Mermaid") isthat her father disapproves of the man she loves, because he belongs to adifferent race. He wants her to marry a member of the tribe, whom she dislikesbecause "he's so . . .serious."When her intended is shot dead by a young British soldier and Smith is takenprisoner, her immediate thought is, "I'll never see John Smithagain!" So much for any lingering regrets over the dead fiancé.Themovie hurries on to the big picture, which is that Pocahontas, raised incommunion with nature, can help John Smith free himself of the moralconstipation of European civilization. "You can't step in the same rivertwice," he learns, and "listen with your heart, and you willunderstand." Since these lessons are taught by an Indian maiden with awaist-length mane of black hair, an hourglass figure and a Playmate face, JohnSmith's heart finds it easy to listen, and soon he is singing a hymn to the newland. (He does not, however, sing a love duet with Pocahontas, because theromantic theme "If I Never Knew You" was cut from the movie,reportedly because the kids in test audiences found it boring. Without such atransition, their relationship emerges rather abruptly.) What is especiallygood about "Pocahontas" is the artistry of the animation. The bigpicture - the new land of towering forests, sparkling streams and rugged cliffs- is drawn with a freedom and energy that has real power. And, as in "TheLion King," the landscape includes a precipice from which the characterscan survey their domain - a rock jutting out into the sky, making an idealpulpit for sweeping sentiments.Theweakness of the movie is its lack of a colorful villain.AfterScar in "The Lion King" and the fearsome Beast in "Beauty andthe Beast" (not to mention the jealous undersea denizens of "TheLittle Mermaid" and the scheming Jafar of "Aladdin"), the badguys in "Pocahontas" seem pretty nice, really. Ratcliffe, the leaderof the expedition, is shown more as a buffoon than a villain. The soldier whokills Pocahontas' fiance immediately regrets his error. The other Britishsoldiers are essentially members of the chorus. And the Indians are all, ofcourse, noble to one degree or another.Thatleaves only the concept of misunderstanding as the real villain - and afterPocahontas helps the two sides communicate, there is no more dramatic tension.The film's ending is rather weak, too. After Smith describes the glories ofLondon to Pocahontas and her eyes sparkle, she decides after all that her placeis "here, with my people" and there is a bittersweet conclusion asshe watches Smith's ship sail back to the Old World. I knew Pocahontas visitedEurope in real life, and was hoping the movie would get her there, too; theending came as an anticlimax.Allof these problems make "Pocahontas" less entertaining than it mighthave been, and the comic relief - the cute raccoon, the hummingbird and thegovernor's dog - seem obligatory after the similar creatures in the othermodern Disney cartoons. What's left is simply the grandeur of the New Land,which tends to ennoble all of the characters. Drawn with true artistry, andevoked in musical sequences like "Just Around the River Bend," thisvision is the true star of the film, and its spirit is evoked by oldGrandmother Willow, a tree that gives Pocahontas a lot of sound advice.Thefilm looks great, the songs are wonderfully visualized, and the characters areappealing. "Pocahontas" is just fine as family entertainment. But ona list including "Mermaid," "Beauty," "Aladdin"and "Lion King," I'd rank it fifth. It has a lot of good intentions,but a severe scoundrel shortage.
