“Rush Hour” is our reliable friend, the Wunza Movie, pairing twoopposites: Wunza legendary detective from Hong Kong, and wunza Los Angeles cop.And wunza Chinese guy, and wunza black guy. And wunza martial arts expert andwunza wisecracking showboat. Neither wunza original casting idea, but together,they make an entertaining team. The movie teams up Jackie Chan, king of lighthearted actioncomedy, and Chris Tucker, who crosses Eddie Murphy with Chris Rock and comes upwith a guy who, if you saw him a block away, you'd immediately start wonderinghow he was going to con you. There are comic possibilities even in theirpersonal patterns. Chan is not known for his effortless command of English, andTucker is a motormouth. Chan's persona is modest and self-effacing, and Tuckerplays a shameless self-promoter.The story: During the last days of Hong Kong's status as aBritish colony, supercop Chan busts up a smuggling ring, but the mastermindsescape to the United States. There they kidnap the daughter of the Chineseconsul, who tells the FBI he wants Chan, a family friend, flown in to help withthe investigation. The feds want nothing to do with a cop from overseas, andthey also don't want the LAPD involved. So they get the idea of pairing up theChinese guy and the L.A. cop so they can keep each other out of the way.At L.A. police headquarters, this idea is well-received afterthe chief (the redoubtable Philip Baker Hall) realizes it's a way to get hismost troublesome detective out of his hair. That would be Carter, played byChris Tucker as the kind of loose cannon who roars around the streets in avintage Corvette and works undercover in dangerous situations.Neither cop likes teamwork. Both work best alone. But Chandoesn't know his way around L.A., and Tucker needs to earn points with hischief. That's enough to fuel the lightweight screenplay by Jim Kouf and RossLamanna, which contains a lot of genuinely funny lines and even a reference toRoscoe's Chicken and Waffles, of “Jackie Brown” fame.Chan is, of course, noted for his stunts, which he performshimself, without doubles. “Rush Hour” has a neat little example of hiswall-climbing ability and a breathtaking sequence in which he leaps from adouble-decker bus to an overhead traffic sign to a truck. And there's a scenein a high atrium where he falls from a beam and slides to safety down a silkstreamer. (It's useful to point out, I suppose, that although Chan does his ownstunts, they are indeed stunts and not death-defying risks; he does what a stuntman would do, but with the same safeguards and deceptive camera angles. He isbrave, agile and inventive, but not foolish.) I like the way the plot handlesSoo Yung (Julia Hsu), the consul's young daughter. Instead of being treatedlike a helpless pawn, she's portrayed as one of Jackie's little martial artsstudents in Hong Kong (“Have you been practicing your eye gouges?”), and whenthe kidnappers try to carry her off, she causes them no end of trouble. I alsoliked the way Chris Tucker (who was funny in “Money Talks”) talks his way intoand out of situations, using a distracting stream of dialogue while he figuresout what to do next. “Rush Hour” is lightweight and made out of familiarelements, but they're handled with humor and invention, and the Wunza formulacan seem fresh if the characters are Botha couple of engaging performers.Footnote: All Jackie Chan movies end with outtakes, whichusually show him missing on stunts and breaking bones, etc. This time theemphasis is mostly on bloopers, where he and Tucker blow their lines. I likethe missed stunts better. It's not that I enjoy seeing Jackie waving bravelyfrom the stretcher as they wheel him into the ambulance, but that there's atradition involved. To be sure, with the two major stunts in this movie, anymistakes could have been his last.
