“The Brothers McMullen" tells the stories of threeIrish-American brothers who are all struggling through relationships withwomen. Whatmakes it almost unique among recent American movies is that the struggles haveless to do with sex than with morality. When was the last time you saw a movieset in contemporary times where the characters seriously dealt with moralchoices in their lives? The brothers were raised on Long Island, and now, forvarious economic and personal reasons, they find themselves living under thesame roof again. We meet them early in the film at a birthday party. There'sJack (Jack Mulcahy), early 30s, married to Molly (Connie Britton), an Englishteacher who is just turning 30.There'sBarry (Edward Burns), in the middle, who is at the family dinner with hissoon-to-be ex-girlfriend Ann (Elizabeth P. McKay).Andthere's Patrick (Mike McGlone), mid-20s, who has been dating a Jewish girlnamed Susan (Shari Albert).Duringthe course of the film, all of these relationships will be shaken; some end,and new ones begin. If this were a more ordinary film the characters would havesex rather casually, as a backdrop to slick dialogue, lifestyle satire andcomedy. But "The Brothers McMullen" goes its own way, and is quietlyfascinating in how it invites us to ask, along with the characters, how theycan do the right thing.Allthree brothers have been raised as Catholics, and are now at that trickyspiritual stage where they still believe what they were taught in church, butdon't always act accordingly. Because they have well-developed senses of sin,they suffer from guilt - but not enough to stop sinning. Who among us doesn'tknow what that feels like? Jack is happily married. Molly is the love of hislife. And yet when Ann, Barry's now former girlfriend, makes a blatant play forhim, he is too weak to resist. He hasan affair, if such a word can be used for a relationship that essentially makeshim miserable.Barrymeanwhile crosses paths with a young actress named Audry (Maxine Bahns), andbegins to like her - even love her - without feeling ready for a"commitment." Meanwhile still, young Patrick, the most religious ofthe three, breaks up with Susan rather than move in with her, which he thinkswould be sinful. His virtue has apparently suffered some lapses, however, sinceSusan eventually reveals that she is pregnant and plans to have an abortion.Patrick thinks that is morally wrong, and is cornered: If he marries Susan, she'llhave the baby, but Patrick now sees clearly that he doesn't love her anddoesn't want to spend his life in his father's business. (An old high schoolfriend named Leslie, played by Jennifer Jostyn, provides a convenient soundingboard, and eventually more.) The brothers try to keep their affairs more orless private from one another, but eventually almost everything comes out, in aseries of confrontations where they're good at telling each other what shouldbe done, but not so good at taking advice. One of the best scenes is aconversation between Jack and Molly, in which she tells him she knows he'shaving an affair, and asks him to explain himself. This scene, and severalothers, approach the unadorned simple truth of life.Hangingover all of their choices is a complicated childhood. In the movie's firstscene, after their father's funeral, their mother announces she is returning toIreland to be with the man she should have married. She urges them not to wastetheir lives on the wrong person as she did. (The father is referred to at onepoint as "our favorite wife-beating, child abusing alcoholic.") Thesebrothers, having seen an unhappy marriage up close, want to make the rightchoices and are not always clear about how to do that."TheBrothers McMullen" was written and directed by Edward Burns, who playsBarry. It's a Cinderella story: a film shot on weekends for $24,000 that wonthe 1995 Sundance festival, was picked up by Fox Searchlight and transferred to35-mm., and launched the careers of everyone in it. Lots of young directorsmake independent films on weekends, but few of them show Burns' introspectionand serious purpose in a film that is also, intermittently, a comedy.Themovie brings into focus how rare religion and spirituality are in Americanfilms - especially when they are viewed as part of real, flawed lives. This isnot a "religious" film, and the brothers are far from saints. Butthey know right and wrong, and in their imperfect ways they are struggling toattain a state of grace. Sometimes they slip. Sometimes they don't struggle sohard.Life'slike that.
