“D3: The Mighty Ducks” is the first movie title I've seen thatcorrectly predicts its grade on Entertainment Weekly's movie report card: a D.The Mighty Ducks, Minnesota's underdog kid hockey team, are back again, in athird version of more or less the same story: Evil, petty, vindictive,mean-spirited, cheating, lying snobs try to stop them, but the Ducks, afterfirst dealing with cockiness, infighting, pride, anger and a new coach, redeemthemselves in the big match. “You'venever heard of the Anaheim Mighty Ducks?” asks Charlie, the team's top scorer. “Theynamed a pro team after us!” He uses this as a pick-up line with a cute brunet.Maybe it would have worked even better if he'd added, “And the same companythat owns the team produced all three Mighty Duck movies, in a transparentexercise of cross-promotion!” As the movie opens, the state champion Ducks haveall been given scholarships to snobby Eden Hall, a private academy with ahockey program so good that they have more flags hanging from the ceiling oftheir arena than a used-car lot on Washington's Birthday. Not everyone is happyabout these newcomers, who bring blacks, Asians, Jews, fat kids and even a girlinto the famous hockey program, which is apparently otherwise made up mostly ofrich white snobs.Leadingthe bigots is the sneering Dean Buckley (David Selby), who tries everything hecan think of to sink the scholarships. And then there's the varsity coach (JackWhite), who is capable of pep talks to his boys like: “They don't belong in ourschool. Now show them why!” The Ducks are devastated as the movie opens todiscover that beloved Coach Bombay (Emilio Estevez) won't be with them anymore.Bombay, the hot-shot lawyer who began coaching them as a form of court-orderedcommunity service, has moved on to the Junior Goodwill Games. Their new coachis a former pro player named Coach Orion (Jeffrey Nordling), who lectures ondefense.“I'ma scorer,” sniffs the star player, Charlie (Joshua Jackson). We've seen morethan one movie, and can guess where *that* kind of talk will lead, although weare not prepared for the way the script delivers with a bludgeon rather than ascalpel: The Ducks go out to a 9-0 lead, but don't play defense, and so theiropponents then score 9 straight goals to tie the match.Themovie's desperation can be seen in several totally contrived scenes, of whichthe most obvious shows the fat kid losing control while on in-line skates,rolling away while Charlie speeds to rescue him. The kid, screaming piteouslyfor help, rolls down a flight of stairs, into city traffic, past snarling dogs,etc., while sometimes skating on one leg, knocking over garbage cans, etc., andfinally flying through the air and somehow landing just as Charlie is able tosave him. The problem here is that only one of the best skaters in the worldcould possibly have performed well enough to do all of these stunts; we wonderwhom the movie is trying to fool.Mostof the dramatic scenes involve a feud between the freshman Ducks and the snobvarsity, who stick them with the bill at an expensive private club, leading tothe first movie scene since the 1930s in which we are asked to believe that thepenniless diners could work off their bill by washing dishes. Othertime-killers include a scenic trip to the Mall of America, and a curious sideplot involving old Hans (Joss Ackland), who has followed the team since thebeginning, always believed in them and listens to their games on the radiowhile shaking his head sadly at their follies.Hansis a familiar kind of movie fixture: a character obviously doomed to die beforethe end of the film. I've gotten to where I can spot them in their first shots,and I whisper “He's gonna die!” to my wife, who tells me to be quiet and watchthe movie.Atthe end of the film, there is skullduggery involving the Ducks' freescholarships, which of course can be settled if they win a big match and ifCoach Bombay comes back to practice his formidable legal skills. Everyone inthe movie seems to agree that athletic skill is the only criterion forscholarships at Eden Hall, a school where I cannot remember anyone ever takingany classes, although my attention may have wandered.Willthere be a “D4”? Do ducks quack?
