“Pleasantville” is a movie about a bland 1950s world in whichlives go around in circles, until time travelers break in with the virus ofchange. Some writers have attacked the movie, arguing that things were betterin the 1950s than they are now. They might enjoy “I'll Be Home for Christmas,”an exercise in cinematic Ovaltine. The movie takes place in the present, I guess, but it feels likea 1950s sitcom. The characters have much in common with old (not new) Archieand Jughead comics. The soundtrack includes Gene Autry tunes, not selected forironic purposes. It's the kind of movie that just misses a G rating and getsslapped with a PG for rudeness.Oh, it'll have its fans. The star is Jonathan Taylor Thomas,from TV's “Home Improvement,” who is an immensely likable actor. But even hiseasy grin seems to weary a little by the later stretches of the film, which isunrelentingly corny.The plot: Thomas plays Jake, a student at Palisades University,a campus on the Pacific coast that, in this film, looks like a high schoolwhere Our Miss Brooks would still be on the faculty. His dad has sent him aticket to fly home to Larchmont, N.Y., for Christmas, but his devious plan isto cash it in for two tickets to a beach resort and persuade his girlfriendAllie (Jessica Biel) to go along. Then Jake's dad bribes him with a restored'57 Porsche if he'll come home for Christmas.Jake's rival for Allie's affections is Eddie (Adam Lavorgna),but this is the kind of movie where Allie is such a nice girl she doesn't evenconsider Eddie--no, not even when she drives cross-country with him. Which shedoes because she is convinced Jake has stood her up. Jake was actually thevictim of a practical joke, in which Eddie and his pals dressed him in a Santasuit and dumped him in the desert, where turkey vultures eye him beadily, ho,ho.Jake wears the Santa suit for the rest of the movie, as hedesperately tries to get home to Larchmont, rescue Allie from Eddie, etc. Asyou can imagine, the Santa costume inspires countless wheezy attempts at humor.It even gets him entered in a Santa 5K Charity Run, where all the contestantsare dressed as Santa. (In a heartrending finale, he beats the mayor, but stillallows the mayor to donate the cash prize to buy turkeys for those without abird on the table for the holidays.) Of course Jake steals a sleigh for the bigclimax.There is possibly an audience for this movie, but I have theoddest feeling that on opening night the people in the theater will all be inblack and white. See “Pleasantville” if you wonder what I mean. In fact, see “Pleasantville”anyway. “I'll Be Home for Christmas” will appeal to people who fail to care ifnothing good happens in a movie, just as long as nothing bad happens in it.
