It's hard to feel much sympathy for the heroine of “Let's TalkAbout Sex,” as she regards the wreckage of her dreams. Jazz (Troy Beyer) is anewspaper advice columnist in Miami who wants her own TV show, and the movie isabout a very long weekend during which she interviews lots of women about lotsof sex, and then edits together a pilot of a show to be called “Girl Talk.”Alas, the pilot tape is mistakenly destroyed. When Jazz hears the news, she is asdistraught as a heroine in Greek tragedy. She doubles up in pain. Her body iswracked by great cataclysmic sobs. Her two friends weep in sympathy, the threeof them wailing and gnashing. So great is their grief that mere words cannotencompass it, and they sink to the ultimate form of lamentation: They cleanhouse. Bitter salt tears course down their cheeks as they Ajax the bathtub andBab-O the pots and pans, while the audience collapses in disbelieving laughter. Jazz's reaction seems a tad extreme, especially in comparisonwith her other big tearful moment, when she confesses she cannot have children.That merely makes her sob. Losing the tape turns her into Lady Macbeth. She wasso distraught, I wanted to climb right up there on the screen, squeeze herhand, and comfort her. “Look,” I would have said, “First of all, you still haveall the raw footage, so you can easily re-create the film in no time. Secondly,almost everything you had on your pilot tape is too raunchy to be played on acommercial television station, anyway, so maybe it's better this way.” “Let'sTalk About Sex,” written and directed by Beyer, plays like two bad films tryingto elbow each other out of the frame. Film One consists of the documentaryfootage gathered by Jazz and her friends as they ask Miami Beach women to talkabout sex (a lot of this footage seems to involve real women who think they arein a real documentary). Film Two involves the romantic ordeals Jazz and her tworoommates, Michelle (Paget Brewster), and Lena (Randi Ingerman).They all have problems. Jazz has just broken off a long-runningengagement with her boyfriend. Michelle dates men for sex but not for intimacy.Lena attracts men who treat her the way Michelle treats men. All three womenare drop-dead beautiful and live in a Miami Beach penthouse that illustratesthe rule that characters in movies always live in more expensive housing thanthey could afford in real life.Leaving aside the melodrama about the three friends (and thesub-melodramas of Michelle's lesbian sister and Lena's no-good musicianboyfriend), we're left with a lot of footage of very strange women describingtheir very strange sex lives. The movie shows the women being recruited withfliers, but they talk more like they're involved in a slam at the PenthouseForum.Few of the interviews will give male audience members even ashred of hope that they will ever succeed in truly pleasing a female. We learnthat men are uncaring, unskilled and underequipped; worse, we go to sleep aftersex, when women know that's the perfect time for deep, meaningful conversation.Remember that old college boy joke about how, after sex, the ideal women turnsinto a pizza and a six-pack? In this movie, the ideal man turns into a vibratorand Ted Koppel.
