Hollywood used to import movie stars from overseas. Thendirectors. Then they remade foreign films. Now the studios import entiregenres. It's cheaper buying wholesale. “The Big Hit” is a Hong Kong actioncomedy, directed by Che-Kirk Wong (“Crime Story”), starring an American castand written by Ben Ramsey, an American who has apparently done as much time in thevideo stores as Quentin Tarantino. The movie has the Hong Kong spirit right down to the deadpandialogue. Sample: Hit Man: “If you stay with me you have to understand I'm acontract killer. I murder people for a living. Mostly bad people, but ... “ GirlHe Has Kidnapped: “I'm cool with that.” The characters in these movies exist ina Twilight Zone where thousands of rounds of ammunition are fired, but no oneever gets shot unless the plot requires him to. The bullets have read thescreenplay.As the film opens, we meet four buddies working out in a healthclub. They're played by Mark Wahlberg (of “Boogie Nights”), Lou DiamondPhillips, Bokeem Woodbine and Antonio Sabato Jr. The guys are hunks with bigmuscles, which we can study during a locker room scene where they stand aroundbare-bottomed while discussing Woodbine's recent discovery of masturbation,which he recommends as superior to intercourse, perhaps because it requiresonly one consenting adult.Then they dress for work. They're all garbed as utility workers,with hard hats, toolboxes and wide leather belts holding wrenches andflashlights. As they saunter down the street to Graeme Revell's pumpingsoundtrack, they look like a downsized road company version of the VillagePeople.The plot: They attack the heavily defended high-rise strongholdof a rich pimp who has just purchased three new girls for $50,000 a head. Theybreak in with guns blazing, and there's an extended action sequence ending withone of the heroes diving out of an upper floor on a bungee cord, just ahead ofa shattering explosion. And so on.They kidnap Keiko (China Chow), the daughter of a rich Japaneseexecutive. Complications ensue, and she ends up in the hands, and later the cartrunk, of the leader of the hit men, named Melvin Smiley (Wahlberg). This ismost likely the first movie in which the hero hit man is named Melvin Smiley.But he does smile a lot, because his weakness is, “I can't stand the idea ofpeople who don't like me.” You would think a hit man would have a lot of peoplewalking around not liking him, but not if he is a good enough shot.Keiko falls in love with Melvin with astonishing rapidity. Sure,she tries to escape, but by the end she realizes her future lies with his. Willthis complicate Melvin's life? Not any more than it already is.He has a black mistress (Lela Rochon), who looks at adismembered body in their bathtub and says, “He's kinda cute.” And he has aJewish fiancee (Christina Applegate), who is Jewish for the sole purpose ofhaving two Jewish parents (so they can appear in the middle of the movie likerefugees from a Woody Allen picture and provide crudely stereotypedcaricatures). Gould makes crass remarks about his wife's plastic surgery, getsdrunk and throws up on Lou Diamond Phillips, in a scene where both actorsappear to be using the powers of visualization to imagine themselves elsewhere.Many more action scenes. Cars explode. Cars are shot at. Carsland in trees. They fall out of trees. Remember those old serials where someonegot killed at the end of an installment, but at the beginning of the nextinstallment you see them leap quickly to safety? That trick is played threetimes in this movie. Whenever anyone gets blowed up real good, you waitserenely for the instant replay.I guess you could laugh at this. You would have to be seriouslyalienated from normal human values and be nursing a deep-seated anger againstmovies that make you think even a little, but you could laugh.
