Even if it were not for its parallels with the recent OklahomaCity bombing, "Top Dog" presents serious problems. Why, exactly,would you want to make a movie about racist hate groups, and then disguise itas family entertainment about a cute dog? The movie stars Chuck Norris as a SanDiego cop who becomes partners with the dog, named Reno, after it sees its previousmaster killed by racists. "TopDog" is so familiar with cop movie clichés that as the movie opens Norrisis already under suspension from the force - eliminating the need for theobligatory scene where the chief asks for his gun and his badge. This time, thechief wants him back, because neo-Nazis have blown up a building with childreninside, in an opening sequence with chilling reminders of Oklahoma City.ThatReno is some dog. In that bombing sequence, it goes into a burning building andbrings out a baby, neatly wrapped in a blanket. Later, it sniffs out bombmaterials. But its neatest trick is sniffing out an album with the photos andaddresses of several synagogues the bad guys plan to bomb. Maybe it doesn't usethe sense of smell. Maybe it has X-ray vision. Norris takes Reno to visit hismom (Jerta Ware), who in another of the movie's chilling parallels, tells herson the neo-Nazis "will probably attack tomorrow." Why, mom?"Because it's Hitler's birthday - April 20." Mom is right. We see theracists planning their attack, inside an Abandoned Warehouse, which of courseis the venue of choice for such summits. They sit around a table furnished witha dozen of those green-shaded "banker's desk lamps" that are alwayson sale for $29.95 in the DAK catalog.Themovie, which is mercifully brief, arrives quickly at its climactic scene, asthe racist conspirators plot violence at an ecumenical "Racial Unity"ceremony. In a plot development that will have kids whispering awkwardquestions, three religious leaders - a priest, a rabbi and a Hindu holy man -are trapped inside a limousine that is wired with a bomb.Norrishas to crawl under the car, find the bomb (helpfully equipped with a beepingdigital time readout), and defuse it by pulling the red - or is it the blue? -wire. (The police chief is not too prudent, in my opinion, in leaning againstthe side of the limo during this operation, instead of taking shelter severalblocks away.) I can't blame "Top Dog" for the unfortunatejuxtaposition with Oklahoma City; this movie was made months ago. But what Idon't find amusing is the way it employs a plot that is very specifically aboutracist hate groups, and then adds a cute shaggy mutt to make itself look like afamily picture. Although the PG-13 rating makes no mention of the subplot aboutracism, I wouldn't want to be a parent explaining why the bad guys wanted toblow up those people.
