The further north you go in summer, the longer the twilightlingers, until night is but a finger drawn between the dusk and the dawn. Suchnights in northern climes are times of revelry, when lads and maids frolic inthe underbrush to the pipes of Pan. Woody Allen's "A Midsummer Night's SexComedy" sneaks up rather suspiciously on this tradition; his men and womenare rationalists, belong to such professions as finance, medicine, andpsychiatry, and are nonchalant in the face of such modern inventions as flyingbicycles. And yet here they all are, out in the country for the weekend. Theygather at a little cottage somewhere in upstate New York, arriving by carriageor primitive auto, and in no time at all they are deeply unhappy about eachother's sex lives. The host and hostess are Woody Allen and Mary Steenburgen.He is a stockbroker and she is his shy and sweet wife. The guests include JoséFerrer, as an egotistical scientist, Mia Farrow, as his fiancée, Tony Robertsas a doctor, and Julie Hagerty as his abundantly sexed nurse. Duringthe course of their long weekend, many themes emerge, but the most common oneis the enigma of male jealousy. Look at these three men, each one paired withthe wonderful woman of his dreams. Allen, a part-time crackpot inventor, has awife who loyally supports his experiments. Ferrer, an aging genius with amonstrous ego, has a beautiful young woman to hang on his arm. Roberts, an insatiablesatyr, has a nubile nurse panting with desire. Are all three men happy andsatiated? Not a chance. It is the most inevitable thing in the world that eachman should be consumed with lust for one or more of the other women. It is notenough to have a bird in the hand; one must also have another bird in the bush.Or, as Gore Vidal and David Merrick have both observed, "It is not enoughfor me to succeed. Others must fail."Fromthis simple and intriguing little situation, Woody Allen spins a rondelet ofsexual intrigue and frustration. The basic developments: Allen pines away withthe thought that he could once have made love to Farrow, but declined thechance. Ferrer conspires to meet Hagerty in the woods. Roberts attempts toseduce Farrow. And, through it all, Steenburgen steadfastly hopes for the bestfrom everybody. To pass the time in between assignations and intrigues, thecouples picnic, go for walks in the woods and express curiosity in Allen'slatest inventions, which, in addition to the flying bicycle, include a metalsphere that can provide a magic lantern show that remembers the past andforesees the future.Thisall sounds very charming and whimsical, and it is almost paralyzingly so."A Midsummer Night's Sex Comedy" is so low-key, so sweet and offhandand slight, there are times when it hardly even seems happy to be a movie. I amnot quite sure what Allen had in mind when he conceived this material, but inaddition to the echoes of Shakespeare and of Bergman's "Smiles of a SummerNight," there are suggestions of John Cheever's Wapshots, Doctorow's"Ragtime," and Jean Renoir films in which nice people do nice thingsto little avail.Thisis not a "Woody Allen film," then. It is not a brash comedy, it doesnot really contain the Woody Allen persona, and I guess Woody wanted it thatway; he says he wants to try new things instead of giving people the same oldstuff all the time. It is our misfortune that he arrived at that decision justafter making "Annie Hall" and "Manhattan,” two wonderful filmsthat brought his same old stuff to an exciting new plateau.Now,with "Stardust Memories" and this film, he seems rudderless. I don'tobject to "A Midsummer Night's Sex Comedy" on grounds that it'sdifferent from his earlier films, but on the more fundamental ground that it'sadrift. There doesn't seem to be a driving idea behind it, a confident tone togive us the sure notion that Allen knows what he wants to do here. It's atip-off that the story is lacking in both sex and comedy. If the film seems ata loss to know where to turn next, the ending is particularly unsatisfactory.It involves a moment of fantasy or spirituality in which one of the movie'smost rational characters dies and turns into a spirit of light, and bobs awayon the twilight breeze. I don't object to the development itself, but to theway Allen handles it, so briefly and incompletely that it ends the film withwhat can only be described as a whimsical anticlimax.Thereare nice small moments here and reflective, quiet performances, and a fewlaughs and smiles. But when we see Woody pedaling furiously to spin thehelicopter blades of his flying bicycle, we're reminded of what we're missing.Woody doesn't have to be funny in every shot and he doesn't have to becomeanother Mel Brooks, but he should allow himself to be funny when he feels likeit, without apology, instead of receding into cuteness. I had the feelingduring the film that Woody Allen was soft-pedaling his talent, was sitting onhis comic gift, was trying to be somebody that he is not -- and that, even ifhe were, would not be half as wonderful a piece of work as the real WoodyAllen.
