“An Awfully Big Adventure" is a soggy British drama set inthe lean years after World War II, when everything was still rationed,especially, it would seem, cheerfulness. It takes place in Liverpool, aprovincial town, served by a provincial theater that defines the very essenceof provincialism, since everyone associated with it keenly feels his or herdistance from London. "Youare," the theater director assures his cast on the first day ofrehearsals, "the very best people we could find - for the money."They look glum at this news, but not surprised. The director, named MeredithPotter and played by Hugh Grant, is himself a damaged piece of goods - a bitter,chain-smoking man whose emotions are reined in too tightly because, we suspect,he once let them out too loosely, and got hurt.Intothis morass wanders a stage-struck local girl named Stella (Georgina Cates),who will take a job, any job, just to be near what she sees as theatricalglamor - and, in her town, she's right. She gets hired as the assistant stagemanager, and soon begins discovering and guessing the various secrets of thecompany - although some very big ones are saved for the end of the film. And shebecomes the object of passes from some of the men in the company, although shehas a rather chilling effect on one when she replies to his advance, "Idon't like the feeling of it, thank you very much." Stella is not the mostattractive of young women, and some critics have faulted the film becausemembers of the company are drawn to her. They miss the point, which is that intheir desperate situation, emotional beggars can't afford to be choosers, andStella's relative innocence and naivetémake her glow in contrast to the weariness all around.Thecompany struggles through its repertory season, until a mishap leaves themshorthanded. There is nothing to do but call on the legendary P.L. O'Hara,played by that invaluable British character actor Alan Rickman as a man ofgreat talent who has lost his way, and who masks despair with cynicism.Rickman(a villain in American movies such as "Die Hard" and "RobinHood: Prince of Thieves") is the company's former resident villain - thebest Capt. Hook anyone has ever seen. Soon he has his hooks in poor Stella, whois not so much defenseless as cooperative; she surrenders in anticipation ofhis attack.Asa portrait of the company and its emotional tangles, "An Awfully BigAdventure" has a gritty authenticity; it's based on a novel by BerylBainbridge, who may be transmuting some of her own early experiences. But asdrama and melodrama, the movie stumbles.Thesurprising revelations at the end are so enormous that, in all fairness, theybelong nearer the beginning; the whole film is a warm-up for a third act thatnever happens.Themovie was directed by Mike Newell ("Enchanted April," "FourWeddings And A Funeral"), who grapples with the problem that no one in themovie is especially nice. Hugh Grant, who made this film before "FourWeddings," has recently had to face the criticism that he works too hardat being ingratiating and likable. Not in this film; along with "TheEnglishman Who Went Up a Hill and Came Down a Mountain," it shows that he hasrange as an actor. But his character desperately cries out for others who willbe counterpoint, instead of harmony, to the general gloom.
