“It Takes Two" is the kind of movie that ought to put rocksin its pockets to keep from floating away. It's so featherbrained andlightweight, it almost elevates its inconsequence into a style. Becausethe plot is numbingly predictable, that leaves only the performers as a sourceof entertainment.Luckily,they're quite engaging: Kirstie Alley continues to be the robust girl next doorwith the big smile, Steve Guttenberg is likable in the Donald O'Connor role,and the Olsen twins, from TV's "Full House," play the two look-alikes- which is a relief, since it's always such a distraction when one actor playsa dual role and you have to spend the whole movie trying to spot the trickphotography.Theplot, inspired by Mark Twain's The Prince and the Pauper, involves an orphanedstreet urchin named Amanda Lemmon (Mary-Kate Olsen) and a billionaire'sdaughter named Alyssa Callaway (Ashley Olsen). Both are living under direthreats. Amanda is about to be adopted into the evil Butkus family, whosefather uses child labor in his junkyard. And Alyssa's dad, a widower played byGuttenberg, is about to marry the hateful Clarice (Jane Sibbett), who plans toship the kid straight off to boarding school.Therich folks go to their country estate, which is across the lake from a summercamp for orphans, donated in memory of Callaway's late wife. Amanda and Alyssaboth run away, are mistaken for each other, carry off the deception, and latermeet up and decide to conspire. Amanda admires her social worker Diane (KirstieAlley), and both girls think she'd make a much better wife than Clarice.Thisis obviously such an excellent idea, and Clarice is such a gushing phony, thatit's all the movie can do to prevent the inevitable until the final scenes.Along the way the girls set up a Meet Cute between Diane and Callaway,involving runaway horses, that leads to a food fight and a scene where theyjump into the lake fully clothed and almost kiss. Clearly, Callaway does nothave his mind focused on marriage."ItTakes Two" is the kind of movie where both the butler (genial PhilipBosco) and the fiancée find out about the other woman by spying her through aconvenient telescope. Where both girls are effortlessly able to hide under orbehind anything, eavesdrop on everything, and make up plans on the spur of themoment. Where the race against time to the altar involves a Jeep, a helicopterand a horse-drawn carriage. Where the girls are wise beyond their years.Wheresweet little blond 11-year-old girls can get adopted only by Dickensianvillains. And where the key love scene involves two people lovingly pickingmacaroni and cheese out of each other's hair.Themovie is harmless and fitfully amusing. It contains one clever line ("Guyslike him like girls with food names - Cookie, Candy, Muffin. . ."). Butsomeone should have informed the filmmakers that the name Butkus, synonymous inthe movie with all that is evil, will always have a certain beauty - indeed,will sound not sinister but melodic - among those for whom line-backing has anymeaning at all.
