“Just Cause" starts out strong and then, boy, does it jumpthe rails. It'sthe kind of movie where you look at the screen and start imagining thepush-pins holding the 3-by-5 cards to the cork board in a Hollywood office, asthe filmmakers try to keep the plot straight.Whenthe movie's over, you realize that the first hour only seemed convincing: Thewhole movie is made out of thin air.Asthe movie opens, a Harvard law professor named Armstrong (Sean Connery) isattacking capital punishment in a campus debate.Thenan elderly black woman (Ruby Dee) hands him a letter from her son, who is onDeath Row in Florida for a murder he says he didn't commit. Armstrong tries tohand the letter back, but she looks him fiercely in the eye and says, "No,no, you keep it. It's got your name on it." This is the best scene in themovie.Armstronggoes home, where his wife, Laurie (Kate Capshaw), is masterminding a party fortheir young kids. She reads the letter.Thenshe encourages him to take the case, even though he hasn't practiced law in 25years: "Every once in a while, you gotta get a little bloody. It's goodfor the soul." This seems curious. Not many mothers of small childrenencourage the other half of a May-December marriage to take complicated pro-bonocases on Florida Death Rows.Later,her words make sense - or at least they are explained.Armstrongflies south to meet Bobby Earl, the prisoner (Blair Underwood), and we getflashbacks showing how Bobby was arrested on suspicion of the kidnapping, rapeand murder of a little girl. In a harrowing scene, a local black cop namedTanny Brown (Laurence Fishburne) beats a confession out of him, at one pointclicking a pistol in Bobby's mouth in a version of Russian roulette.Armstrong's investigation shows that Bobby Earl was railroaded, that theforensic evidence doesn't hold up and that he got a pathetic defense from alocal attorney (Ned Beatty), who whines: "I lost half of my businessdefending that SOB - and he got the chair! Can you imagine what it would havebeen like if he'd been acquitted?" By now we feel we're on pretty soundground. We are not, although I must be cautious not to give away plot details,since this movie is, finally, all plot. There are a couple of good clues earlyon that everything is not as it appears. For example, the movie illustrates theLaw of Conservation of Star Power, which teaches, "In a thriller, a starwho receives second billing to the hero, and whose role seems clear at the endof the first hour, will be revealed as the opposite of what he seems." Themovie also makes good use of the Tangled Web Syndrome, which is found inthrillers where all of the events of today are revealed to have their roots inlong-ago events.Butenough. Most people will want to see this movie because of the presence of SeanConnery in the leading role, and on that score, if on no other, they will gettheir money's worth. When it comes to expressing quiet wrath, Connery is anactor like few others, and here, where he is a mild-mannered law professor andfamily man, he keeps his action side well concealed until an absurd climax thathas him all but wrestling alligators. I especially enjoyed the scenes where hemoseys through a hostile Southern town, keeping his cool while the localcrackers insult him, and always remembering to thank them "for yourtime." If his role is the strong center of the film, none of the otheractors have an easy time of it. That's because the corkscrews of the plotprevent them from being consistent from beginning to end.Reflect,after you see the film, about how hard it must have been for a couple of theactors to describe 180-degree turns in their motivations. The movie depends onan audience with a short attention span, since if we remember some of theevents of the first 30 minutes clearly, we will be asking tricky questions longafter the movie is over.Mybasic complaint with "Just Cause" is that it's simply an exercise inplot manipulation. Take out the violence and perversion, take out the nastyserial killer in the next cell (played by Ed Harris with Hannibal Lecter'slighting and camera angles), take out the police brutality and the victimizedchildren, and what you're left with is pure Agatha Christie. There is nopsychological depth, no real motivation, no human values to weigh, justcharacters jerked here and there like puppets in an arbitrary plot. I wasserious about those 3-by-5 cards. They're what writers and directors use tokeep everything straight in a movie like this. The audience could use some,too.
