Early in “She's the One,” a beautiful woman named Hope (MaxineBahns) gets into a cab driven by a feckless bachelor named Mickey (EdwardBurns). They fall into conversation. She likes him. She's on the way to theairport but doesn't like planes, so she hires him to drive her to New Orleans.A day later, they are married. Uh, huh. Not likely--especially not in a NewYork cab--and yet Meet Cutes like this have been fueling romantic comediessince time immemorial, and so we go along with the gag. Oncethey return to New York, reality intrudes. Mickey's brother, Francis (MikeMcGlone) is angry because Mickey got married without a best man. Meanwhile,Francis is cheating on his wife Renee (Jennifer Aniston of TV's “Friends”) withHeather (Cameron Diaz).Nowabout this Heather. She used to date Mickey, who knew that she worked her waythrough college as a hooker. They were engaged, but it ended, and now Heatheris dividing her time between Francis and Poppa, a very old, very rich man wenever see. Heather is described as working on Wall Street, but her jobdescription may not be precisely what Francis envisions.Mickeyand Francis are Irish-American brothers, who along with their father (JohnMahoney) like to call themselves the Fighting Fitzpatricks. They have a mother,but she is never seen in the movie, only talked about. Their father, who likesto call the boys “Sister” and “Barbara,” believes that even at their agethere's no better way to settle a family dispute than by putting on the glovesand stepping into the backyard.“She'sthe One” was written and directed by Edward Burns, whose beguiling comedy “TheBrothers McMullen” won the Grand Jury Prize at the 1995 Sundance Film Festival.The brothers Fitzpatrick are not quite so beguiling, and the movie feels likematerial from the same pot, stirred and shaken, with a touch of screwball. Ifthis were exclusively a screwball comedy--involving romantic misunderstandingsand revolving doors--it might have worked better, but unfortunately Burnsallows an element of Sincerity and Psychological Insight to take over, and themovie bogs down in earnestness.Thetwo big moral issues in the film seem rather contrived. One involves Hope who,having married Mickey within 24 hours, now wonders how to tell him she plans toleave for Paris in the fall to study at the Sorbonne and expects him to comealong. My own notion is that a part-time cab driver so unattached he can getmarried in 24 hours is probably not going to balk at the idea of a trip toParis with his beautiful new wife. But the movie treats Paris as a feministissue: Is Mickey comfortable with the idea that Hope has these plans, etc., ordoes he have tiresome old ideas that since he's the man...etc.? (Of course Hopeperhaps should have mentioned Paris during the whirlwind courtship, but nevermind.) The other moral issue involves brother Francis, who is a successful WallStreet investor, making lots of money and plotting to dump his wife for hismistress. But the mistress is not so sure she wants to be married to Francis,and there's Poppa waiting in the wings. He may pack a colostomy bag, but heknows How to Treat a Woman, which is, in a movie like this, something the herowill never, ever understand. Diaz (“The Mask”), as the mistress, proves againthat she is a real actress, in addition to being one of the most beautifulwomen in the movies; it's interesting how she lets Heather maintain a certainprivacy and reserve, so that we can't make easy assumptions about her.Aroundthey go, the Fighting Fitzpatricks, with the action punctuated by fishing tripsduring which Dad imparts wisdom that it takes all of John Mahoney'sconsiderable skill to keep from sounding as if it had just been downloaded fromEdward Burns' word processor. Many of the scenes will create a sense of deja vuif you've seen “The Brothers McMullen”; Burns and McGlone play roles verysimilar to their characters in the earlier movie, and Bahns' character is not amillion miles removed.Althoughthe movie disappointed me, it did not dishearten me about Edwards Burns as anactor or filmmaker. He knows how to move a scene, and he has a nice feel forthe ground-level human touches that make his characters real.Hisfuture, though, may be as an actor: He and Bahns both have genuine star power,and it would be interesting to see them in the hands of a director more willingto exploit their attractiveness and charisma.IfBurns wants to continue at the helm, however, I hope he expands his reach. Bythat I don't mean abandoning his Irish-American worldview and the characters hefinds there, but deepening and pushing and testing. “She's the One” plays likean overhaul of “The Brothers McMullen” with a larger budget, and it's time forhim to move on.
