“Sliding Doors” uses parallel time-lines to explore thedifferent paths that a woman's life might take after she does, and doesn't,find her lover in bed with another woman. I submit that there is a simple testto determine whether this plot can work: Is either time-line interesting initself? If not, then no amount of shifting back and forth between them canhelp. And I fear they are not. The movie stars Gwyneth Paltrow as Helen, a London publicityexecutive who is fired for no good reason, and stalks out of her office inmidmorning to take the underground train back home. In one scenario, shecatches the train. In the other, she misses it because she's delayed, and thedoors slide shut in her face. To save confusion, we will call these Scenarios Aand B.In A, Helen arrives home unexpectedly and finds her lover, Gerry(John Lynch), in the sack with his mistress, Lydia (Jeanne Tripplehorn). Sheconfronts them, walks out, goes to a bar and runs into James (John Hannah).James recognizes her because earlier he chatted her up on the train. Over thenext few days, Helen A is comforted by her best friend, gets her long hair cutand dyed blond, and begins to fall in love with James.In Scenario B, Helen misses the train, and by the time shearrives home Lydia is already off the scene. But she begins to suspect thingswhen she realizes two brandy glasses were on the dresser. Eventually Helen Bfinds out about Lydia, who is the kind of woman who gets sadistic satisfactionout of popping up unexpectedly and threatening to blow Gerry's cover.The film cuts backs and forth between A and B. It is clear thatGerry is a creep, Lydia is a Fatal Attraction and James is a thoroughly nicebloke, although the requirements of Screenwriting 101 force the movie into amanufactured crisis in which it appears that James may have been lying to HelenA. There's even one of those scenes that maddens me, in which James goes toHelen A's best friend's house, is told of the misunderstanding, could say twoor three words to clear it all up--but doesn't, because he is a puppet of theplot.Gwyneth Paltrow is engaging as the two Helens, and I have nocomplaints about her performance. Pity about the screenplay. It requires her toappear to be unobservant, gullible and absentminded as the faithless Gerry hemsand haws through absurdly contrived emergencies. The worst moment comes when heopens the kitchen blinds, and Lydia is standing right outside them, staring athim. He slams them shut and tries to pretend nothing happened. What we havehere is a particularly annoying movie gimmick in which the other person (Lydia,in this case) knows exactly when and where to position herself to create theshock effect. We aren't allowed to wonder how many hours, or days, she wasposted outside, maybe in the rain, waiting for him to open the blinds.I am grateful that the movie provides Helen A and Helen B withdifferent haircuts, which helps tell the story lines apart (a bandage is usedin the early scenes). But as we switched relentlessly back and forth between Aand B, I found that I wasn't looking forward to either story. True, James isplayed by Hannah with warmth and charm, but to what effect? Is he interestingas a person? Does he, or anyone in the film, have much to say that's not at theservice of the plot? I would have preferred Hypothetical Scenario C, in whichGwyneth Paltrow meets neither James nor Gerry, and stars in a smarter movie.
