There is an unpleasant way in which “The Chamber” and theprevious John Grisham thriller, “A Time to Kill,” linger over the racism andhate language of their characters. Yes, the racist characters are the villains.But the ugly things they say linger in the air, there to be admired by anyoneon their wavelength. Anysubject, including racism, can be the legitimate material of a movie. But I amnot happy when I see deep wounds in our society being opened for the purpose ofentertainment. “The Chamber” is not a serious movie about anything, and so whencharacters are allowed to rant at length about their hatred of AfricanAmericans and Jews, repeating the most vile hate clichés, what I get from thescreen is not simply dialogue but the broadcasting of dangerous language.Sometimesracially charged language plays a defensible role, as it did in MartinScorsese's “Casino,” a thoughtful film that dealt with the tension betweengangsters of Italian and Jewish descent. But in the two Grisham films thisyear, I get the queasy feeling that race hate is working like a condiment toadd spice to otherwise unremarkable courtroom stories. That's particularly truebecause the villains in each film (played by Kiefer Sutherland in “A Time toKill” and Gene Hackman and Raymond Barry in “The Chamber”) are the mostcolorful characters, overwhelming the more pedestrian heroes played by MatthewMcConaughey and Chris O'Donnell.“TheChamber” tells the story of a young Chicago lawyer named Adam Hall (O'Donnell)who wants to go down South to handle the final appeal of a murderer on DeathRow. The killer, a Klan member named Cayhall (Hackman), has been convicted ofsetting off a bomb in the offices of a Jewish civil rights attorney. Theattorney's two young sons were killed; he was maimed and later committedsuicide. What the movie reveals fairly quickly is that Adam Hall is Cayhall'sgrandson. Adam's father also committed suicide--perhaps because of the violentacts he watched Cayhall perform.Themurders took place in the 1960s. Appeals have dragged on for years, but now thetime of execution is near. Adam goes south and discovers old family secretsfrom his aunt (Faye Dunaway), who watched years ago as Cayhall shot gunned aneighboring black man to death. Cayhall quickly discovers who his new attorneyreally is, and reacts with a litany of colorful hate language.Ihave heard all of Cayhall's clichés before, but they have pretty muchdisappeared from general use in America, and there will be some youngeraudience members hearing them for the first time. How will these words affectthem? In both “A Time to Kill” and “The Chamber,” the Ku Klux Klan, with itssecret meetings and ghostly costumes, is presented in a way that is technicallynegative but could seem thrilling. The films portray the Klan as criminal,racist and anonymous, but those have always been its selling points; it is notportrayed as boring and stupid.Thereal subject of “The Chamber” is the family left behind by old Sam Cayhall: hisson, a suicide; his grandson, who dreams of a Death Row miracle; his daughter(Dunaway), who has married a local banker and says she's “done pretty well forpoor white trash. But when the world finds out I'm Hitler's daughter . . .”Flashbacks show how Cayhall murdered the father of his son's black playmate,traumatizing his children and sending remorse spiraling down through thegenerations.BecauseCayhall is played by Gene Hackman, an actor who implies decency in his verybones, we know that he will not go to the gas chamber spouting Klan slogans. Ifthe film's purpose had been to present an unredeemable villain, they would havecast Christopher Walken, Dennis Hopper, M. Emmet Walsh or another actor who canbe read as completely hateful. Hackman is a superb actor, but even in his mostvile moments here, the musical score undermines the effect by sneaking infeelings of sadness and thoughtfulness. Listen carefully when the grandson tellsCayhall about a fake bomb in his motel room; the music playing under Cayhall'sreaction gives away the ending.O'Donnellis sincere and focused as the lawyer, but he is really too young to bring muchmore to the role. Since he hates racism, why does he want to defend hisgrandfather? Because he hates the death penalty more? Or because he hopes for adeathbed conversion? The movie's own attitudes toward the death penalty areconfused; Hackman brilliantly delivers a long monologue describing the effect ofpoison gas on the system, but then the movie suggests some people may deservethat very effect.Thereis also some confusion involving Cayhall's relationship with anotherconspirator named Rollie Wedge (Raymond Barry). Without giving away details,all I can suggest is that Cayhall's loyalty serves the plot, not common sense.And, given the fact that Cayhall has spent years in prison mouthing thelanguage of the Klan, it is inexplicable that the movie has a scene in which hequietly nods a sad farewell to his black fellow inmates on Death Row. I didn'tbelieve his behavior, and I particularly didn't believe theirs.Inthe early days of X-rated movies, they were always careful to include somethingof “redeeming social significance” to justify their erotic content. Watching “TheChamber,” I was reminded of that time. The attitudes about African Americansand Jews here represent the pornography of hate, and although the movie ends bypunishing evil, I got the sinking feeling that, just as with the old sex films,by the time the ending came around, some members of the audience had alreadygotten what they bought their tickets for.
