But "The Living Sea" basically only wants to presentpretty pictures. Some of them are impressive: a Coast Guard rescue boat plowingthrough heavy seas. A strange, recently discovered deep-water creature namedthe Cyphonophon, made up of hundreds of different individuals that formspecialized sections of an organism half the length of a football field.Time-lapse photography of the Bay of Fundy in Canada, where swift tidalcurrents make a spectacular difference in sea level during the course of a day. But the movie is content with first impressions. A dummy isthrown overboard by the Coast Guard, ostensibly to demonstrate its skill inhigh seas rescue. But there is no footage of a rescue (an end credit shot showsthe boat returning to the dummy, in seas that are suspiciously calmer). TheCyphonophon is shown on video monitors as a deep-sea robot sub examines it, butthe whales and other great sea creatures are seen only in ordinary traveloguefootage. And if the time-lapse photography at Fundy Bay serves a dramaticpurpose - we are amazed by how far the tides fall and rise - what's the purposeof later speeded-up shots of sailboats zipping around a bay? One section of themovie looks at surfing. We've seen shots like these before, over and overagain. One shot shows the towering kelp fields off California; "Into theDeep" has more impressive shots.There'sa frustrating visit to the Palau Islands, near the Philippines, where a"landlocked ocean lake," cut off since prehistoric times, sheltersrare species. But we see few of them, and a segment on the people of theislands, where in the past "each family tended a reef like a garden,"is perfunctory.Iwould have liked to see a whole film on many of these individual topics. Lifeon land and sea in Palau. How the Coast Guard plucks a sailor from a ragingsea. How deep-sea exploration is exploding the count of living species onplanet Earth. "The Living Sea" seems reluctant to look very deeplyinto anything, as if afraid of testing its audience's patience. But it takesless patience to look at one interesting thing deeply than many interestingthings hardly at all."TheLiving Sea" will play daily at the Omnimax Theater of the Museum ofScience and Industry every 50 minutes, starting at 10 a.m., with the last showat 3 p.m. on weekdays and 4:40 p.m. on weekends.Therewill be evening screenings at 7 and 8 p.m. Fridays and Saturdays, and ascreening in Spanish at 5:30 p.m. Sundays.
