“The Quick and the Dead" takes the premise of those oldTough Man Contests and moves it to the old West, where the sadistic despot of asmall town holds a shoot-off every year. The rules are simple: The last manalive wins a big cash prize. It's a movie that is intimately familiar with theconventions of Westerns, especially those rules that state: (a) when a Kidcomes riding into town for a showdown with the big man, he is probably theman's unacknowledged son, and (b) when a woman rides into town, also for ashowdown, she is probably seeking revenge for a terrible wrong in the past. Themovie stars Gene Hackman as a man named Herod, who lives in a dark, Dickensianhouse that looms at the end of Main Street.Protectedby henchmen in long black leather coats, he collects a 50 percent tax on allbusiness in the town, shoots anyone who gets out of line and holds his bloodycompetition once a year.Inthis contest, anyone can enter. The contestants are paired off, and at thestroke of 12 on the town clock, they stand in the middle of the street andshoot at each other. One must die in order for the other to win. Then it's onto the next round (in this town it's "High Noon" over and overagain). The last man standing collects the prize money.Herodis always the last man standing. I figured that out because he's still alive.His motives for holding this contest may seem obscure, but actually they arepretty clear; he holds it because it provides a simplistic story structure forthe movie, giving it a long series of duels on Main Street as a substitute forany form of genuine dramatic conflict.You'dthink contestants would have to be pretty hard up to enter a contest where theodds are about 10-to-1 in favor of their being killed. But there's no shortageof entrants, including one guy who adds an ace to his deck every time he killssomeone, and another who cuts a scar into his arm after every kill. Alsoarriving are two strangers: the Kid (Leonardo DiCaprio) and Ellen (SharonStone). The Kid is cocky and self-confident: "Damn, I'm fast!" hesays after polishing off one opponent, and later he asks idly, "Is itpossible to improve on perfection?" Ellen is a little harder to read. Sheis a lone rider who puffs on a thin black cigar and makes a bartender regret itwhen he assumes she's a hooker. She's sexy in leather pants and a trim outfit(and later manages to find a ballroom gown in her saddlebags). She wants toenter the contest. Hackman, who is attracted to her, doesn't want either Ellenor the Kid to shoot it out, possibly because he suspects that the Kid is hisown son.Oh,he denies it. But the Kid is adamant. "I'm his son," he declares,"and if this is the only way he's gonna admit that, so be it." Inother words (I think), the theory is that if the Kid kills Hackman, by golly,that'll make him admit it.Themovie's story, as you have grasped, isn't much. But "The Quick and theDead" is not without its good points. The director is Sam Raimi (the"Evil Dead" movies, "Darkman") and he displays once againhis zest for stylistic invention. Early in the movie, a character gets shotthrough the hat brim, and the sun shines through the hole into the camera lens.A nice touch, but Raimi tops it later in the film by showing the sun shiningthrough a bullet hole clean through a guy's body, and by a third shot in whichwe look down Main Street through a large hole in a man's head.Thecinematographer, Dante Spinotti ("The Last of the Mohicans") makesthe material look terrific. The lowering skies around the isolated town make itlook ripe for vengeance of biblical proportions, and there are quiet satiricaltouches, as when a man stands in a saloon door and his shadow seems about 6miles long. It also helps the visuals that it rains all the time in this town(although when it doesn't, nothing is green).Itmust also be said that Hackman somehow survives the material.Iam beginning to believe he is an actor who can say anything and make it work.As preposterous as the plot was, there was never a line of Hackman dialoguethat didn't sound as if he believed it. The same can't be said, alas, forSharon Stone, who apparently believed that if she played her character assilent, still, impassive and mysterious, we would find that interesting. Moreswagger might have helped. Do you suppose she took the plot seriously?
