"Wigstock"is an annual outdoor drag festival held on Labor Day every year in Manhattan,where, the city being fairly blase about such events, most of the audiencelooks straight and middle-class, and the performers extol dressing in drag andwearing outrageous wigs as a form of self-discovery. Therapy, even. Theshow is a sort of low-rent Woodstock, with a big stage, a painted backdrop, anda great deal of amplification equipment for the performers, most of whomlip-synch to hit songs, and one of whom is actually named Lypsinka.Thereis a career to be made here: Lypsinka has become an underground star, and thenthere is the towering superstar RuPaul, coming home to the show that started itall, and remembering that he was advised he was just too tall to be a woman:"There wasn't no big, black drag queen in the pop world," they toldhim, but "look at the - - - - - now!" The documentary, filmed at the1992 and 1993 Wigstocks, goes backstage to show performers rehearsing andphilosophizing about life in drag. It's a little startling to see them in andout of costume and makeup, and to realize most of them actually look better aswomen than as men: It's like a little object lesson about how much women, too,depend on makeup to create illusion.Wemeet "The Lady" Bunny, who emcees the event, has a sense of humorabout it, and tries to persuade the city to put a wig on the Statue of Liberty(no luck). And Alexis Arquette, brother of Rosanna and Patricia, and lookingenough like them that they could do a family version of the Andrews Sisters.And the Dueling Bankheads, who are more or less what you would expect, twinTalullahs - except, of course, that you wouldn't expect them.Theusual female singers are evoked in the lip-synch numbers: Barbra Streisand,Liza Minnelli, Diana Ross. Lip-synching is an art I have never muchappreciated; in the old days of TV's "Original Amateur Hour," itranked down there somewhere below playing "Lady of Spain" on theaccordion. What is good, onstage at Wigstock, is the dancing; we see the hoursof rehearsal that go into the routines, and it's obvious many of the performersare gifted, probably professionals.Theunderlying message of "Wigstock" is pretty obvious. The drag queensdiscuss their lifestyle as if it were the most normal things in the world,while we're thinking, gee, maybe it would seem more intriguing if they weren'tso matter-of-fact. There is a sense in which all those who deviate from thenorm - body piercers, leather fetishists, transvestites, people who gettattooed, or are into S&M - seem compelled to tell us how ordinary andhealthy their practices are, when I, for one, would be more interested if theysaid their lives took them far beyond everyday experience into the hinterlandsof the bizarre. Everybody wants to be accepted."Wigstock"is basically a big outdoor production of your average drag show. There aremoments that are fun, and people who are smart or engaging, and the obligatoryreaction shots of the cheerful audience, but there's none of the documentaryskill and insight that went into a film like Jennie Livingston's "Paris IsBurning" (1991), a documentary that gave us a sense of the drag life as aself-contained universe with drama, sorrow and anger, as well as the goodtimes. This movie puts a safe, public face on people who surely cannot be asconventional as they appear here.
