“Breaking the Waves” is emotionally and spiritually challenging,hammering at conventional morality with the belief that God not only sees all,but understands a great deal more than we give Him credit for. It tells thestory of Bess, a simple woman of childlike naivete, who sacrifices herself tosexual brutality to save the life of the man she loves. Is she a sinner? Thegrim bearded elders of her church think so. But Bess is the kind of personJesus was thinking of, I believe, when he suffered the little children to comeunto him. Themovie takes place in the 1970s, in a remote northern Scottish village. Bess(Emily Watson), a sweet-faced and trusting girl, is “not quite right in thehead,” and her close-knit community is not pleased by her decision to marry Jan(Stellan Skarsgard), who works on one of the big oil rigs in the North Sea. Butshe loves Jan too much that when the helicopter bringing him to the wedding isdelayed, she hits him in a fury. He is a tall, gentle man with a warm smile,and lets her flail away before embracing her in his big arms.Sheis a virgin, but so eager to learn the secrets of marriage that she accosts hernew husband in the powder room at the reception after the ceremony, telling himeagerly, “You can love me now!” And then, “What do I do?” The miracle of sexualexpression transforms her, and she is grateful to God for having given her Janand his love and his body.Meanwhile,downstairs at the ceremony, Jan's shipmate and Bess' grandfather scowl at oneanother; the shipmate crushes a beer can, and the grandfather picks up alemonade glass and breaks it in his bloody hand.Welearn a little about Bess, who had a breakdown when her brother died. Herclosest friend is her sister-in-law, Dodo (Katrin Cartlidge), a nurse who staysin the remote district mostly because of her. Bess belongs to a strict sectwhere women do not speak in church, and the sermon over the body at a funeralmight be, “You are a sinner and will find your place in hell.” Bess'grandfather observes sourly, “We have no bells in our church.” Jan iscritically injured in an accident on the rig. He is paralyzed from the neckdown, and the local doctor tells Bess he may never walk again. “You don't knowJan!” she says fiercely. One day Jan asks her to find a man and make love tohim, “for my sake. And then tell me about it.” Bess does not like this idea,but she does what Jan asks. Dodo is enraged: “Are you sleeping with other mento feed his sick fantasies? His head's full of scars--he's up to his eyeballsin drugs.” It is indeed never made quite clear why Jan, a good man, has madethis request of the woman he loves. That is not the point. The point is thatBess, with her fierce faith, believes that somehow her sacrifice can redeem herhusband and even cure him. As his condition grows worse, her behavior growsmore desperate; she has herself taken out to a big ship where even the portprostitutes refuse to go, because of the way they have been treated there.Thefilm contains many surprising revelations, including a cosmic one at the end,which I will leave you to discover for yourself. It has the kind of raw power,the kind of unshielded regard for the force of good and evil in the world thatwe want to shy away from. It is easier sometimes to wrap ourselves in sentimentand pious platitudes, and forget that God created nature “bloody in tooth andnail.” Bess does not have our ability to rationalize and evade, and fearlesslyoffers herself to God as she understands him.Thisperformance by Emily Watson reminds me of what Truffaut said about James Dean,that as an actor he was more like an animal than a man, proceeding according toinstinct instead of thought and calculation. It is not a grim performance andis often touched by humor and delight, which makes it all the more touching, aswhen Bess talks out loud in two-way conversations with God, speaking bothvoices--making God a stern adult and herself a trusting child. Her churchbanishes her, and little boys in the village throw stones at her, but she tellsDodo, “God gives everyone something to be good at. I've always been stupid, butI'm good at this.” “Breaking the Waves” was written and directed by Lars vonTrier, from Denmark, who makes us wonder what kinds of operas Nietzsche mighthave written. He finds the straight pure line through the heart of a story, andis not concerned with what cannot be known: This movie does not explain Jan'scruel request of his wife, because Bess does not question it. It shows peoplewho care about her, such as the sister-in-law and the local doctor, and otherswho do not: religious bean-counters like the bearded church elders. Theyunderstand nothing about their Christianity except for unyielding rules theyhave memorized, which means they do not understand Christianity at all. Theytalk to God as if they expect him to listen, and learn. At the end of the filmthey get their response in a great savage ironic peal.Notmany movies like this get made, because not many filmmakers are so bold, angryand defiant. Like many truly spiritual films, it will offend the Pharisees.Here we have a story that forces us to take sides, to ask what really is rightand wrong in a universe that seems harsh and indifferent. Is religious beliefonly a consolation for our inescapable destination in the grave? Or can faithgive the power to triumph over death and evil? Bess knows.
