In the middle of this epic film there is a quiet, small scenethat helps explain why “Gandhi” is such a remarkable experience. MahatmaGandhi, at the height of his power and his fame, stands by the side of a lakewith his wife of many years. Together, for the benefit of a visitor from theWest, they reenact their marriage vows. They do it with solemnity, quietwarmth, and perhaps just a touch of shyness; they are simultaneouslydemonstrating an aspect of Indian culture and touching on something verypersonal to them both. At the end of the ceremony, Gandhi says, "We werethirteen at the time." He shrugs. The marriage had been arranged. Gandhiand his wife had not been in love, had not been old enough for love, and yetlove had grown between them. But that is not really the point of the scene. Thepoint, I think, comes in the quiet smile with which Gandhi says the words. Atthat moment we believe that he is fully and truly human, and at that moment, aturning point in the film, Gandhi declares that it is not only a historicalrecord but a breathing, living document. This is the sort of rare epic film that spansthe decades, that uses the proverbial cast of thousands, and yet follows ahuman thread from beginning to end: “Gandhi” is no more overwhelmed by thescope of its production than was Gandhi overwhelmed by all the glory of theBritish Empire. The movie earns comparison with two classic works by DavidLean, “Lawrence of Arabia” and “Doctor Zhivago”, in its ability to paint astrong human story on a very large canvas. The movie is a labor of love by Sir RichardAttenborough, who struggled for years to get financing for his huge but"non-commercial" project. Various actors were considered over theyears for the all-important title role, but the actor who was finally chosen,Ben Kingsley, makes the role so completely his own that there is a genuinefeeling that the spirit of Gandhi is on the screen. Kingsley's performance ispowerful without being loud or histrionic; he is almost always quiet,observant, and soft-spoken on the screen, and yet his performance comes acrosswith such might that we realize, afterward, that the sheer moral force ofGandhi must have been behind the words. Apart from all its other qualities,what makes this movie special is that it was obviously made by people whobelieved in it. The movie begins in the early years of thecentury, in South Africa. Gandhi moved there from India in 1893, when he wastwenty-three. He already had a law degree, but, degree or not, he was a targetof South Africa's system of racial segregation, in which Indians (even thoughthey are Caucasian, and thus should "qualify") are denied fullcitizenship and manhood. Gandhi's reaction to the system is, at first, almostnaive; an early scene on a train doesn't quite work only because we can'tbelieve the adult Gandhi would still be so ill-informed about the racial codeof South Africa. But Gandhi's response sets the tone of the film. He isnonviolent but firm. He is sure where the right lies in every situation, and hewill uphold it in total disregard for the possible consequences to himself. Before long Gandhi is in India, a nation ofhundreds of millions, ruled by a relative handful of British. They rule almostby divine right, shouldering the "white man's burden" even thoughthey have not quite been requested to do so by the Indians. Gandhi realizesthat Indians have been made into second-class citizens in their own country,and he begins a program of civil disobedience that is at first ignored by theBritish, then scorned, and finally, reluctantly, dealt with, sometimes bysubterfuge, sometimes by brutality. Scenes in this central passage of the moviemake it clear that nonviolent protests could contain a great deal of violence.There is a shattering scene in which wave after wave of Gandhi's followersmarch forward to be beaten to the ground by British clubs. Through it all,Gandhi maintains a certain detachment; he is convinced he is right, convincedthat violence is not an answer, convinced that sheer moral example can free hisnation as it did. "You have been guests in our home long enough," hetells the British, "Now we would like for you to leave." The movie ispopulated with many familiar faces, surrounding the newcomer Kingsley. Wherewould the British cinema be without its dependable, sturdy, absolutelyauthoritative generation of great character actors like Trevor Howard (as aBritish judge), John Mills (the British viceroy), John Gielgud, and MichaelHordern? There are also such younger actors as Ian Bannen, Edward Fox, IanCharleson, and, from America, Martin Sheen as a reporter and Candice Bergen asthe photographer Margaret Bourke-White. Gandhi stands at the quiet center. And BenKingsley's performance finds the right note and stays with it. There arecomplexities here; “Gandhi” is not simply a moral story with a happy ending,and the tragedy of the bloodshed between the Hindu and Muslim populations ofliberated India is addressed, as is the partition of India and Pakistan, whichwe can almost literally feel breaking Mahatma Gandhi's heart. I imagine that for many Americans, MahatmaGandhi remains a dimly understood historical figure. I suspect a lot of us knowhe was a great Indian leader without quite knowing why and such is ourignorance of Eastern history and culture we may not fully realize that hismovement did indeed liberate India, in one of the greatest political andeconomic victories of all time, achieved through nonviolent principles. What isimportant about this film is not that it serves as a history lesson (althoughit does) but that, at a time when the threat of nuclear holocaust hangsominously in the air, it reminds us that we are, after all, human, and thuscapable of the most extraordinary and wonderful achievements, simply throughthe use of our imagination, our will, and our sense of right.
