"This is it?" the Cincinnati printer asks dubiously,looking at the page proofs for the newsletter Larry Flynt wants him to print."You've got to have text--like Playboy." Flynt is unyielding. He isinterested in gynecological detail, not redeeming social merit. Soon hisnewsletter has blossomed into Hustler magazine, although not withoutdifficulties (one editorial conference is devoted to a discussion of why thenumber of a magazine's pages must be divisible by two). Ifyou believe that Hustler is pornographic and in bad taste, you will not get anargument from Flynt. Flaunting the magazine's raunchiness, he became amillionaire while printing cartoons such as the one in which "Dorothy hasa foursome with the Tin Man, the Cowardly Lion and the Scarecrow--oh, andToto." Emboldened by his success, Flynt grew more outrageous, untilfinally one of his parody ads inspired a $40 million lawsuit from the Rev.Jerry Falwell.WasFalwell right to be offended? He certainly was; the parody of a Smirnoff ad wasin outrageously bad taste. Did Flynt have a right to print the parody? TheSupreme Court eventually decided that he did. No one in their right mind couldbelieve that what the ad said was true (as Falwell himself admitted from thewitness stand), and the right of free speech includes the right to offend.TheSupreme Court's ruling in the Hustler case came under attack at the time, butconsider this: If Falwell had won his suit against Flynt, this newspaper wouldbe fundamentally different. The editorial cartoons could not make fun of publicofficials. The op-ed columns could not risk offending. The lawyers might havequestioned a recent review in which I said a film should be cut up into ukulelepicks; after all, that might have hurt the director's feelings. And Falwellhimself might not have been able to broadcast his sermons, because they mighthave offended atheists (or you, or me)."Ifthey'll protect a scumbag like me, then they'll protect all of you," Flyntsaid after his 1987 court victory. Inelegant, but true. Milos Forman's"The People vs. Larry Flynt" argues that the freedom of speech mustapply to unpopular speech, or it is meaningless. Beginning with this belief,Forman constructs a fascinating biopic about a man who went from rags to richesby never overestimating the taste of his readers.Ifyou question the dimensions of Hustler's success, reflect that a modernskyscraper towers in Los Angeles, proclaiming FLYNT PUBLICATIONS from itsrooftop. Even if he's only leasing, that's a lot of rent. When Flynt startedHustler in 1972, Playboy was already 20 years old and Penthouse was a success.He aimed below them--at the vulgar underbelly of the market--and offeredpictorial details that Playboy, at least, has never been interested inprinting.ForFlynt, played by Woody Harrelson, Hustler was like winning the lottery. He wasa Kentucky moonshiner's son who ran away from home and eventually ran stripclubs in Cincinnati. There he found the love of his life: Althea Leasure(Courtney Love), a bisexual stripper who bluntly told him, "You are notthe only person who has slept with every woman in this club." Hustler'sfirst publicity breakthrough came when Flynt printed nude photos of JacquelineOnassis, a coup so sensational it forced the media (and the public) to noticethe magazine. "The People vs. Larry Flynt" shows Flynt running aloose editorial ship in which his brother Jimmy (Brett Harrelson), hangers-onand assorted strippers and hookers seem to publish the magazine by committee.Veryearly, he meets a man destined to be a lifelong companion: his lawyer, AlanIsaacman (Edward Norton), who wins his spurs defending him in one action afteranother. An early antagonist is Charles Keating, then head of Citizens forDecent Literature, more recently an S&L crook. "I'm your dreamclient," Flynt tells Isaacman. "I'm fun, I'm rich and I'm always introuble."Themovie shows Larry and Althea as a couple deeply into promiscuity; proposingmarriage to him in a hot tub, Althea is shocked when Larry thinks she meansmonogamy. Their marriage survives many tests, not least the one when Flynt istemporarily converted to religion by Ruth Carter Stapleton, sister of thepresident. (The movie never really makes it clear how sincere Flynt was in hisborn-again period.)Asthe magazine grows, Flynt keeps it on the low road, eventually developingenemies. In 1978, during a trial in Georgia, both he and Isaacman are shot byan unknown gunman, and Flynt is paralyzed from the waist down. That leads to along dark period, until 1983, when he and Althea hole up in a Los Angeles mansion,using pain-killers and whatever other drugs come to hand. The magazine seems torun itself while they cower behind the steel door of their bedroom.Flynteventually has an operation that stops his pain, and he kicks drugs. Leasure,not as lucky, sickens and dies of AIDS. Then comes the suit by Falwell, and ajourney that ends with Flynt pumping his wheelchair into the Supreme Court.LarryFlynt is never likely to find his face on a postage stamp, but he has played arole in our era. A negative one, in contributing to the general decay of tasteand decorum, and a positive one, in being the point man for a crucial defenseof American liberties. As an individual, he seems to have been clueless some ofthe time and morose much of the time (he plays a camera role in the film as ajudge, and looks unhappy).Butlike many another man he was fortunate to find the love of a loyal woman, andAlthea, as played by Love, is a quirky free spirit. The product of a tragicchildhood (she identified the bodies after her father murdered her family, thenshe was sent to an orphanage, where she was abused), she is made by Love into akind of life force, misdirected but uncompromised. It is quite a performance;Love proves she is not a rock star pretending to act, but a true actress, andHarrelson matches her with his portrait of a man who has one thing on his mind,and never changes it.MilosForman's other films include "Amadeus" and "One Flew Over theCuckoo's Nest," both about inspired misfits with the courage of theireccentricity. Now Larry Flynt is another. Who else could have so instinctivelycombined idealism and cash, declaring at a press conference, "Americansfor a Free Press is me. Who do you think is paying for this show?"
