Billy Crystal's "Forget Paris" is a more or lessdeliberate attempt to repeat the success of "When Harry MetSally . . .," his 1989 romantic comedy. Its ingredients look as if they weredevised to appeal to all audiences: This is the first film to find a way tocombine professional basketball with April in Paris. By all rights, the movieshould be a pale imitation of its betters, but sometimes lightning does striketwice, and this is a wonderful film, filled with romantic moments that ringtrue, and with great big laughs. Themovie stars Crystal as Mickey, a popular NBA referee who is known as skilledand fearless (in an opening sequence, he nullifies a sensational game-winninglast-second shot by Charles Barkley). When his father dies, Mickey accompaniesthe body to France, because the old man, who made few friends after the SecondWorld War was over, wanted to be buried with the dead of his Army company. Atthe Paris airport, the body is lost, causing Mickey to scream: "What doyou mean, what did it look like? My coffin was the one with the red yarn on thehandle!" He is screaming at Ellen (Debra Winger), an American in Paris,who works for the airline. She likes his sense of humor. (When Customs laterquarantines the body for health reasons, he screams, "He's dead! He has nohealth!") They meet again at the cemetery, one thing leads to another, hestays in Paris an extra day, and she takes him sightseeing. (Looking at Rodin's"The Thinker," Mickey muses, " `The Thinker' is thinking, `goddamnthat Rodin! Three drinks, and I'm nude.' ") This whole story of theirfirst meeting and gradual courtship is told as a series of flashbacks, in aconversation between an old friend of Harry's (Joe Mantegna) and his fiancée(Cynthia Stevenson).They'rein a restaurant, waiting for others to arrive, and as each new couple joins thetable, it adds details to the saga of Mickey and Ellen. (No prizes for guessingwhich couple arrives last.) Mickey and Ellen were made in heaven for eachother.Unfortunately,their lifestyles were made in hell, and although falling in love is easy forthem (despite various obligatory difficulties), living together is not. Ellenis not thrilled by her first glimpse of Mickey's bachelor pad, which is"kind of a shrine for watching ESPN." Nor does she much like sittingaround at homewhile Mickeycommutes within the far-flung empire of the NBA. The pattern of the movieconsists of fights and separations, followed by reunions and reconciliations,all recounted by the pals around the restaurant table.Itall works. Even the seemingly artificial device of having the friends tell thestory works, especially since Mantegna is a sports writer and his story aboutMickey could be a warning to Stevenson that life with him could also bedifficult. What works especially well is the prickly relationship betweenMickey and Ellen, who are both bright and quirky, and so have interestingfights.Whateveryone remembers about "When Harry Met Sally...," of course, is MegRyan's virtuoso scene in a restaurant, where she fakes an orgasm, and the womanat the next table tells the waiter, "I'll have whatever she'shaving." "Forget Paris" wisely doesn't attempt to duplicate thatscene, but comes up with a classic of its own, involving Winger and a pigeon,that builds into one of the great slapstick moments.Andthen of course there is Paris. No other city has so many associations withmovie romance, and when Mickey realizes he is looking at the Pont Neuf, whichfigured in "An American in Paris," of course we hear Gene Kelly singing"Our Love Is Here to Stay" on the soundtrack.What'sweird is to see scenes of Paris' romance intercut with Mickey's daytime job.The movie convincingly places Crystal in the middle of NBA action, using cameosby a lot of stars; there is a great moment when Kareem Abdul-Jabbar getsejected from his own farewell game by the lovelorn Mickey.Crystalhas made a career out of being smart, quick and glib. It takes a smart actress,like Winger, to match with him, and here, as in the otherwise completely different"Shadowlands," she is the right woman for a man so wrapped up in hiswork that he has no life. Of course, their relationship isn't simple; as Mickeyobserves, "Marriages don't work when one partner is happy and the other ismiserable. They only work when both are miserable."
