“I'm not gonna say any more than I have to, if that," aMiami loan shark named Chili Palmer says, early in "Get Shorty." Theperfect note in this sentence is the addition of if that. It comes with ourknowledge that everyone in the movie will say more than they have to, because"Get Shorty" is based on a novel by Elmore Leonard, that grandmasterof low-life dialogue. Chili(John Travolta) is a man who knows his way around organized crime but dreams ofthe movies. In the course of "Get Shorty's" intricate plot, hefollows a mob assignment from Miami to Brooklyn to Las Vegas to Los Angeles,where he finds himself sitting in the middle of the night in the living room ofa sleaze merchant who produces movies with titles like "The SlimePeople." For Chili, who knows the man's work, it is like being in heaven.Theproducer is Harry Zimm (Gene Hackman, with an overbite).Hehas always moved hopefully on the fringes of the Hollywood big time, making aliving but never making a hit. Chili has broken into his house to intimidatehim into paying a gambling debt. But Chili originally came out west on the tailof a Miami dry-cleaner named Leo Devoe (David Paymer), who collected a $300,000insurance payout when a plane crashed and everyone thought he was on it. Devoeowes the money to "Bones" Barboni (Dennis Farina), a Mafia boss. AndChili, sitting in Harry Zimm's den in the middle of the night, ends up pitchingthis story to the producer because he thinks it would make a good movie.Oneof the pleasures of "Get Shorty" is watching the way the plot moveseffortlessly from crime to the movies - not a long distance, since bothindustries are based on fear, greed, creativity and intimidation. ElmoreLeonard's characters may exist in the crevices of society, but they are smartand verbal, and don't take forever to get to the point. There are a lot ofscenes in the movie where people come into the room wanting one thing and leavewanting another. They are persuaded to change their minds by the seductive lureof Hollywood. Even Barboni (one of Farina's best performances, with a brokennose that grows more painful to look at every time we see it) is not immune tothe glitter.Ofcourse, this is low-grade glitter. We meet a gallery of characters, all playedin a laconic key as Hollywood types for whom all sentiments are cynical. HarryZimm, for example, is found in bed with Karen Flores (Rene Russo), a"scream queen" who is the kind of actress who becomes a cover girlfor Fangoria. She used to be married to Martin Weir (Danny DeVito), a major, ifshort, movie star. They all scheme to get "Shorty" into theirpicture, and the movie's single best scene is one where Travolta gives DeVitoacting lessons in how to look filled with menace.Manycharacters seem lifted from the autobiography of Ed Wood: Bo Catlett (DelroyLindo), who owns a limousine service and is owed big money by Zimm; Bear (JamesGandolfini), a stunt man who thinks he is very tough but has never met anyonelike Chili Palmer before, and Doris (Bette Midler in an uncredited cameo),whose success is based on being as close to a 1930s sex siren as anyone islikely to get in this lifetime.Oneof the tactile pleasures of "Get Shorty" is the dialogue. JohnTravolta has said in interviews that he insisted the original Leonard dialoguebe put back into the screenplay, which had been translated into flat,functional Hollywood Speak. In Time magazine this week, he provides an example:In the novel, when Chili's beloved jacket is taken from a check room, he says,"You see a black leather jacket, fingertip length, has lapels like asuitcoat? You don't, you owe me three seventy-nine. You get the coat back oryou give me the three seventy-nine my wife paid for it at Alexander's." Inthe screenplay, he says, this speech had been changed to, "Where's mycoat? You better find it. It cost $400." Travolta was right to see thatthe soul of the story is in the way the characters speak. What is amazing isthat anyone would buy an Elmore Leonard novel and want to change the dialogue.The language is the whole point. In "Get Shorty," it sings incounterpoint to the plotting, which is so complex it gets funny, especiallyafter $300,000 is put into a locker at the airport and everyone wants it, butthe FBI has it staked out."GetShorty" was directed by Barry Sonnenfeld, a former cinematographer("Miller's Crossing," "Misery") who directed the two AddamsFamily movies. He has made a small jewel: a film that demonstrates, to ouramazement, that even the Hollywood characters in "The Player" werenot quite at the bottom of the barrel.
