There is a point in Jodie Foster's "Home for theHolidays" when a brother and his brother-in-law are fighting on the frontlawn while the father tries to break it up by wetting them down with a gardenhose. Looking across the street at the neighbors gawking, the father snarls,"Go back to your own goddamn holidays!" Themovie, which is about the Thanksgiving family reunion from hell, is not exactlya comedy and yet not a drama, either. Like many family reunions, it has alittle of both elements, and the strong sense that madness is being held justout of sight. Have we not all, on our ways to family gatherings, parked the cara block away, taken several deep breaths, rubbed our eyes and massaged ourtemples, and driven on, gritting our teeth? That is not because we do not loveour families, but because we know them so very, very well.Weget that sense in the opening scenes of "Home for the Holidays," asClaudia Larson (Holly Hunter) discovers she has been fired from her job at aChicago art museum, and responds by kissing her boss; she's already building upholiday hysteria. Claudia is driven to the airport by her teenage daughter Kitt(Claire Danes), who confides she will "probably" experience sex forthe first time over the weekend. At the other end, she's greeted by herparents, Adele and Henry (Anne Bancroft and Charles Durning). Henry's taking ahome video. Adele has brought along an extra parka in case Claudia has losthers (she has).TheLarson family home is a triumph of art direction. It has been furnished withdozens if not thousands of the sorts of objects found in mail-order giftcatalogs. Not expensive catalogs, but the kinds of catalogs with 16 gifts oneach page, each one a "miniature" of something you would not possiblywant the full-size version of, such as a reindeer or a barbershop quartet.Henryis a retired airport maintenance man. Adele chain-smokes all the time and canread her daughter's mind. ("Mom, I'm thinking of a change . . . I may notbe at the museum all that much longer." "They fired you!") SoonClaudia's gay brother Tommy (Robert Downey Jr.) turns up with a new friendnamed Leo Fish (Dylan McDermott). The parents seem to accept their son'shomosexuality without acknowledging it, which is an accurate note for manyfamilies. Claudia is disturbed by the absence of Tommy's former boyfriend, whowas popular with the entire family.ThenClaudia's sister Joanne (Cynthia Stevenson) and brother-in-law Walter (SteveGuttenberg) turn up. Walter cannot stand Tommy. Tommy cannot stand Walter orJoanne, and finds a way to deposit a turkey in her lap without quite seeming asif he meant to.Theseare all routine family problems compared with the arrival of Aunt Glady(Geraldine Chaplin), who is quite mad in her own style of passionate intensity,and has had a crush on Henry since she first laid eyes on him (he looked, sherecalls, like a horse in a uniform).Whatis just right about "Home for the Holidays" is that none of thecharacters act as if they are experiencing any of this for the first time. Evenwhen Aunt Glady drinks too much and announces that her sister's husband kissedher the first time they met, all she draws is a resigned silence; we get thenotion she may make this revelation several times a year.Fosterdirects the film with a sure eye for the revealing little natural moment. Andshe realizes that although the Holly Hunter character supplies the movie'spoint of view, it is up to Durning and Bancroft to supply the center - just asparents do at real family celebrations. Bancroft and Durning have each beenguilty, from time to time, of overacting, but here they both beautifully findjust the right notes of acceptance, resignation, wounded but stubborn pride -and romance. There are moments when they dance together that help to explainwhy families do get together for the holidays, and Durning describes a memoryof one perfect moment in the family's history, and we understand that althoughlife may not give us too much, it often gives enough.Thestory of Tommy, the gay brother, provides a counterpoint to the mainlinemadness. Foster and her writer, W. D. Richter, do not commit the mistake ofmaking his character be about homosexuality. He is gay, but what defines himfor the family is more his quasi-obnoxious personality, his way of picking onhis boring brother-in-law, his practical jokes, his wounding insights, andfinally his own concealed romanticism. Downey brings out all the complexitiesof a character who has used a quick wit to keep the world's hurts at arm'slength. And in bringing along his friend, the mysterious Leo Fish, he hasprepared a surprise that no one, certainly not Claudia, could have anticipated.HollyHunter is a wonderful actress. Here she has a more human and three-dimensionalrole than in her other current movie, "Copycat," but her performancein "Copycat" is even better, maybe because it stands alone, and in"Home for the Holidays," she reacts and witnesses as much as sheinitiates. It's not hard to guess that with her stature and presence sherepresents, to some degree, Jodie Foster. Indeed there are probablyautobiographical elements scattered here and there throughout the cast, butthat's not the point: What Foster and Richter have created here is a film thatunderstands the reality expressed by Robert Frost when he wrote, "Home isthe place where, when you have to go there, they have to take you in."
