High school teachers seem locked in time to us; we seem likepart of a flowing stream to them. My teachers are frozen in the late 1950s, aninnocent time when high school portals had quotations from Milton carved overthe doorways, and no metal detectors. But to them, the Class of 1960 was one of10, 20, 30 or more classes passing through their hands, and even though CoachSmith did assure us at our 10th reunion that "there was never anotherclass like you," we had the suspicion that he said that at all thereunions. "Mr.Holland's Opus" tells the story of 30 years in the life of a high schoolmusic teacher named Glenn Holland, who takes the job in the first place as atemporary measure. His real work, he believes, is to compose music. Teaching isjust a way to pay some bills. He realizes only gradually that it is, in fact,his destiny. (Like they say, "What you're doing instead of your real jobISyour realjob.")As the movie opens, Holland (Richard Dreyfuss) and his wife Iris(Glenne Headly) are a couple fueled by his heady ambitions. He will be a greatcomposer, of that he is sure, but then hard financial realities make him takethe teaching job, where the hard-edged principal (Olympia Dukakis) looks himover sternly and reads him as a man for whom teaching has no seriousness.God knows the school needs a music teacher. At his first meetingwith the high school orchestra, he finds they play badly. How badly? I didn'trecognize the first four notes of Beethoven's Fifth Symphony.(By the end of the film, a successor to this orchestra has so improved that itsounds for all the world like a Hollywood recording stage filled withprofessional session musicians under the baton of Michael Kamen.)Meanwhile, the Hollands have a baby, to Iris's delight andGlenn'ssomewhat more muted pleasure -- which turns to coldness when he discovers hisson, named Cole, is deaf. Holland almost takes it as a personal affront thathis son will not be able to hear the great opus that he still clings to as hisultimate vision.Year follows year, and it is one of the pleasures of "Mr.Holland's Opus," like "Forrest Gump," that the characters livethrough many of the watershed events of three decades: The assassination ofKennedy, the war in Vietnam, the plague of drugs and school violence, and thecost-cutting measures that eventually eliminate programs like Mr. Holland'smusic classes. (The day American high schools admit that "electives"like music, art, and drama are as important as sports will be the day theyvalue culture as much as entertainment for the alums.)Everyteacher has his favorite students, and Mr. Holland has several. One is ahopelessly untalented band member (Alicia Witt). Mr. Holland is not able tomake her talented, but he is able to restore her self-esteem, and she reappearsmany years later as a woman who learned much more than music in his class.Another is a beautiful and talented student (Jean Louisa Kelly), who has hersights set onshow biz, and who falls in love with Mr. Holland, who must walk a delicateemotional tightrope with an end not always in sight.Althoughmuch of the movie involves Mr. Holland helping his students to mature, thecharacter of the son, Cole, provides acounterpoint:A way for Mr. Holland to grow up, too, and accept bothhis son and his life. Some of themscenes between them are painful, and a later scene, where Mr. Holland singsJohn Lennon's "Beautiful Boy" to Cole, is very moving.RichardDreyfuss, who is sometimes too exuberant, here finds theright tones for Mr. Holland, fromyouthful cocksureness to the gentleinsightof age. His physical transformations over 30 years are alwaysconvincing. Glenne Headly has a morethankless role as his wife, but watch her handle the scene where she suddenlysees something she had not suspected, and intuitively knows how to deal withit. The supporting cast is all strong, especially Jay Thomas as the footballcoach who becomes Holland's lifelong friend.Watchingthis film, falling into its rhythm, appreciating its sweep, I could not helpbut remember my own high school teachers. Sitting here at the keyboard, I begana list of their names, only to realize that you have your own list. Amazing,how clearly I remember their excellence, and their patience. One anecdote willdo. StanleyHynes, who taught us Shakespeare, always addressed us as "Mr." and"Miss," as a college teacher would do, and somehow that brought agreater seriousness to "Macbeth" and "Julius Caesar," whichwere uncharted new worlds for us. Modifying the curriculum to make it more"contemporary" and "relevant" is doing an injustice tostudents, whose lives will become relevant to the exact degree that high schoolencourages them to outgrow themselves, and escape from the contemporary intothe timeless. Mr. Hynes knew that. So does "Mr. Holland's Opus."
