Imagine a time when all compliments are two-faced, when everytruth is tinged with irony, when insults are the currency of humor. We havemore in common with the 18th century than we might imagine. “Ridicule” is amovie that takes place at the court of Louis XVI, circa 1783, but its valueswould be at home around the Algonquin Round Table, or in modern comedy clubs.Wit is all. Sincerity is an embarrassment. Themovie tells the story of a provincial baron with a scientific cast of mind. Thepeople of his district are dying because of the pestilent waters, which breedmosquitoes and disease. He has a scheme for draining the marshes and making theland tillable. He needs the help of the king, and so he journeys to Versaillesto press his case. But the king values verbal wit above all, and lives mostlyto be entertained. If the baron cannot develop a savage tongue, he has nochance.Thebaron, named Ponceludon de Malavoy (Charles Berling), is, like all provincials,inclined to give his rulers credit for being better than they are. InVersailles he witnesses shocking displays of public humiliation, which are allpart of the game. He seems to have no chance at all, but then he is taken underthe wing of the wise old Marquis de Bellegarde, played by Jean Rochefort, thattall, long-faced master of sly intrigue. “Be witty, sharp, and malicious,” themarquis tells him, “and never laugh at your own jokes.” The baron somehowstumbles into success; his honesty plays like rudeness, and he doesn't laughbecause he doesn't know he has told jokes. He gains admission to court circles,where he finds that in romance, as well as politics, wordmanship is morecrucial than swordsmanship.“Ridicule”has been directed by Patrice Leconte, a name not well known in this countryunless you have had the good fortune to see “Monsieur Hire” (1990) or “TheHairdresser's Husband” (1992). Those films were about erotic fixations carriedto uncomfortable extremes: about a little man who becomes solemnly obsessedwith the young woman he can see across the courtyard, and about a fetishist(Rochefort) who loves hairdressers so much he marries one, and hums with blissevery time she administers a shampoo.In“Ridicule” the characters are faced with the exquisite torture of seducing oneperson while desiring another. The baron quickly falls in love with Mathilde(Judith Godreche), the kindly marquis' daughter, and she with him. But she isdetermined to marry a distasteful old rich man (they are only waiting for hiswife to die) so that he can finance her research into diving bells. Meanwhile,the baron, for matters of expediency, pays court to the powerful and beautifulMadame de Blayac (Fanny Ardant), who can do him good at court.Shelikes him. Well, he likes her. She understands almost everything about themotives of the people in her life, and at one point, while he is going throughthe motions of wooing her, she looks at him in amusement and advises, “Learn tohide your insincerity, so that I can yield without dishonor.” After all, she isnot a woman without stature; her own official lover is the abbot de Vilecourt.Thekind old marquis sees all and keeps his counsel. He does not have the money tosupport his daughter's research, and sees how much she treasures her divingbells. He rather prefers the baron as a son-in-law, but realizes that no swampsare going to get drained that way. And the king? He has peepholes installed sothat he can secretly observe the real goings-on in his court, the better tosavor the ridiculous posturings of his petitioners when they come into hispresence.“Ridicule”reminded me of the equally fascinating “Restoration” (1995), with Robert DowneyJr. as an ordinary man embraced by the king after he treats his beloved dogs.It was set a century earlier at the equally colorful but somewhat less manneredBritish court of Charles II. Both films show a monarch using his personal styleto set the agenda for his nation, and both are about lifestyles as a work ofart. Both, too, are about simpler men from scientific backgrounds, who findthat being straightforward gets them points at court that they haven't reallyearned.Whatis fascinating about “Ridicule” is that so much depends on language, and solittle is really said. The characters come and go, polishing their one-liners,memorizing their comebacks, desperately walking the line between delectablerudeness and offending the king. None of what they say means anything. It isall words. The eyes carry the meaning. Watch the way the characters look at oneanother, and you can follow the real plot, while they spin their torturedfancies.
