If anybody ever wrote a Field Guide to Alcoholics, withdescriptions of their appearance, sexual behavior and habitats, there would bea full-color portrait on the cover of Tommy, the hero of "TreesLounge." Steve Buscemi, who plays Tommy and also wrote and directed thefilm, knows about alcoholism from the inside out and backward, and his movie isthe most accurate portrait of the daily saloon drinker I have ever seen. Tommyis 31 years old, an unemployed auto mechanic. For eight years he dated Theresa(Elizabeth Bracco), but recently she dumped him, married his ex-boss, and ishaving a baby (maybe Tommy's but who knows?). Tommy, who lives in anunremarkable section of Long Island, spends his days in Trees Lounge, a cornerbar that is perfectly established in an early shot showing Bill, an agingalcoholic, gazing blankly into space before rousing himself to use signlanguage to order another double shot. The close-up of Bill's face is acomplete portrait of a man whose world has grown smaller and smaller, untilfinally it has defined itself as the task of drinking.Tommyhas a stubborn spirit. He goes through the motions of having fun, buteverything in his life is breaking down, including his car, which stallswhenever he removes his foot from the pedal. As a mechanic, you'd think hecould fix it, but he uses more direct methods, asking a friend to keep a footon the gas while Tommy dashes into the lounge for "just one drink."The bartender, who knows him, bets him $10 he can't have just one."TreesLounge" doesn't paint a depressing portrait of Tommy, just a realisticone. Any alcoholic knows that life is not all bad, that there comes a momentbetween the morning's hangover and the night's oblivion when things arebalanced very nicely, and the sun slants in through the bar windows, andthere's a good song on the jukebox, and the customers might even start dancing.Tommy makes some headway one afternoon with a woman he meets in the bar; like alot of drinkers, she can dance better than she can stand.WhenI met Buscemi at the 1996 Cannes Film Festival, where "Trees Lounge"premiered, he said the movie was a portrait of a direction his life was goingin before he started acting. He remembers it well; remembers such perfectdetails as a scene where Tommy's drinking buddy, Mike, is fascinated by astupid bar trick that Tommy is performing ("I'll bet I can drink two beersbefore you can drink one shot"). Mike's wife, who sees him only during pitstops from his drinking, walks into the bar and essentially wants to tell himshe's taking the kid and leaving, but Mike is too interested in the bar trickto focus on this news.Tommymakes money occasionally by driving a Good Humor truck, although he does notlook in good humor. On his rounds he encounters Debbie, a 17-year-old girl heknows (Chloe Sevigny, from "Kids," who finds just the right note forthe role). They spend some time together that leads to a wrestling match at hishouse. "Nothing happened--we just made out like a couple of teenagers,"he later says, but Debbie's father is understandably enraged and destroys theGood Humor truck with a baseball bat.Allof this seeking, drinking, dancing and wrestling is centered on Tommy's painbecause his former girlfriend dumped him. The film comes to its epiphany inwhen he visits Theresa in the maternity ward, and apologizes for being a geekwhen he dated her, and cries and thinks maybe he could straighten out if he hada kid. Drunks always think that if they could fix all the things that arewrong, then they could stop drinking. It never occurs to them to stop drinkingfirst.Buscemiis the house act of American independent films. He was the talkative killer in"Fargo," and Mr. Pink in "Reservoir Dogs," and has been inmore than 30 other recent movies. Critics love to describe him ("skinny,bug-eyed, twitchy"--New York Times; "caffeinated downtown geek whosefeelings seem to bleed right through his pale vampire skin"--EntertainmentWeekly; "oyster-eyed"--Mr. Showbiz). He is above all able to projectthe quality of bone-weariness. It is almost a little noble, the way he endureswhat the disease of alcoholism is putting him through. He keeps planning,dreaming, hoping. And always there is Trees Lounge, where the living dead sitat the bar, waiting for him to return with news of the world.
