A question has been nagging at me ever since the first Batmanmovie, and "Batman Forever" makes it inescapable: Would Bruce Waynecontinue his keen interest in crime fighting if he didn't get to wear theBatman costume? The opening scene plays like a commercial for a rubberwearshop, and throughout the movie, the dominant images are of fetishistic gear:The belt buckles, boots, gloves, capes, masks, and of course, the cute littledime-sized nipples on Batman's and Robin's chests. When Batman tries on his newprototype costume late in the movie, and there's a close-up of its gleamingbuttocks, the audience chuckles knowingly. Batmanwould be a sensation in any leather bar, but "Batman Forever" is atpains to show that he has heterosexual tastes. Nicole Kidman plays Dr. ChaseMeridian, who sounds like a bank, but is, in fact, a student of abnormalpsychology. She's powerfully attracted to Batman the moment she meets him, andwonders what he's looking for in a woman: Would it help, she wonders, if shecarried a whip? She's thrilled that Batman reads her books ("Not everygirl makes a superhero's night table"), but less than thrilled when herdate for the Gotham Charity Circus is boring old bachelor Bruce Wayne. Maybethe clothes do make the man.Thistheme - the girl in love with the image but not the reality - is also standardin the Superman series, where Lois Lane chases the Man of Steel, but rejectsClark Kent. What's new in "Batman Forever" is that Batman himself(Val Kilmer) has to do a little seduction. At the circus, young acrobat DickGrayson (Chris O'Donnell) saves the crowd by rolling Two-Face's TNT bomb intothe river. His family is killed during this process. Bruce Wayne, impressed bythe orphaned young man, invites him to stay at Wayne Manor, but Dick is arebellious motorcycle freak who wants outtathere- until Wayne shows him his collection of bikes, including priceless oldHarleys and Indians. The subtexts in this scene are so deep, you have to wadethrough them.Theplot of the movie involves the embittered Two-Face (Tommy Lee Jones), a formerdistrict attorney who is deranged after half his face is scarred by acid. He'smean, but not brilliant. For brains, the movie provides Edward Nygma (JimCarrey), who uses a computer program to name himself the Riddler, and who hooksup with Two-Face to steal lots of loot to finance his evil scheme.TheRiddler's scheme is one of the more amusing aspects of "BatmanForever," considering that the movie is being distributed by Warner Bros.,a division of Time Warner, which owns HBO and other cable outlets. The Riddlerwants to put a copy of "The Box" on top of every TV set in Gotham.Thisdevice is not exactly an Internet provider. It works by sucking up the brainwaves of its users, transferring them to the Riddler, whose own I.Q. expands atdizzying speed.Althoughthe first two Batman movies were big winners at the box office, there was afeeling after "Batman Returns" (1992) that the series had grown toodark and gloomy. Batman was a reclusive neurotic, his enemies included thedeformed Penguin (raised from childhood in sewers), and the movies tried for amarriage of superheroes and film noir. That didn't work: The message of noir isthat there are no heroes.TimBurton, director of the first two brooding Batman films, steps up to producerfor "Batman Forever," and the new director, Joel Schumacher, makes agenerally successful effort to lighten the material. There are more cleverone-liners for Alfred the butler (Michael Gough), lots of laughs for theRiddler (played by Jim Carrey like a riff on his character in "TheMask"), and even sitcom moments like the one when Alfred tells Bruce Waynethat the "young master" has run off with the car. "TheJaguar?" asks Wayne. "No, sir. The other car." The movie looksgreat, of course; Gotham City is a web of towering spires, bridges andexpressways, planted in a swamp of despond. Boardrooms and laboratories looklike German Expressionist sets, and the charity circus could come straight fromMurnau's "Sunrise." There are neat gimmicks, like the Riddler'sbrain-wave helmet, and neat stunts, as when the Batmobile climbs straight upthe side of a skyscraper. And there is a consistent visual motif: two handsclasping in a firm grip. Dick Grayson is caught in such a grip by his acrobatfather during a dangerous trick, and later the shot is repeated to show thatBruce Wayne is now his surrogate father.Butsomehow Batman still doesn't come alive. Val Kilmer is a completely acceptablesubstitute for Michael Keaton in the title role, but in all three of themovies, Batman remains shadowy and undefined. The movies exist for theirvillains, who this time both seem to be playing the same note; the Riddler andTwo-Face alternate in overacting, until the pace grows wearying. There is norhythm to the movie, no ebb and flow; it's all flat-out spectacle.Isthe movie better entertainment? Well, it's great bubble gum for the eyes. Andyounger children will be able to process it more easily (some kids were ledbawling from "Batman Returns," where the PG-13 rating was a joke).Iliked the look of the movie and Schumacher's general irreverence toward thematerial. But the great Batman movie still remains to be made. Here is the mostcomplex and intriguing of classic comic superheroes, inhabiting the mostvisually interesting world, but somehow a story hasn't been found to do himjustice. A story - with a beginning, a middle and an end, and a Batman at itscenter who emerges as more than a collection of costumes and postures. Morethan ever, after this third movie, I found myself asking, Who was that maskedman, anyhow?
