"Enemy Mine" is "Robinson Crusoe" set under the two suns and six moonsof the volcanic planet Fyrine IV, a grim red landscape lashed bymeteors and savage cold. One day, a century in the future, thespaceships of two warring pilots crash-land not far from each other.One of the pilots is a gee-whiz earthling, and the other one is areptilian humanoid from the planet Dracon. Although they are naturalenemies, they learn to live together, to help each other and eventuallyeven to love each other.The look of the planet in "Enemy Mine" is so convincing, thespecial effects are so elaborate and the performances are so good thatI only gradually became aware of what a clinker the story is. The moviehas the potential to be a truly great story about communication betweenalien species; it could have been a space thriller with a mind and aheart.Instead, it gives us an alien that is too human, too familiar. Ittakes that amazing planet and gives it food, water, gravity andatmosphere that are suitable for both humans and Dracs. It depends onplot gimmicks like the convenient arrival of enemies and the equallyconvenient arrival of friends to the rescue. It doesn't dare enough. How should it dare? The world of science fiction is filled withfascinating aliens - intelligent creatures who are infinitely more thanlovable characters in reptile skins. Why couldn't the Drac be trulyalien in this film? There are occasional moments of inspiration, suchas the fact that Dracs are male and female rolled into one, but "EnemyMine" simply uses that as an excuse for a couple of weepy scenes andthe creation of a Drac child that seems destined for the Little League.The idea of aliens with combined sexes has been handled much moreinterestingly in books like Isaac Asimov's "The Gods Themselves," inwhich there were three sexes, not two. And even the most rudimentaryscience fiction aliens usually manage to seem truly different thanhumans; once the Drac in "Enemy Mine" learns English, he seems scarcelyless human than the human. The Earthman in the movie is played by Dennis Quaid, and the Dracby Louis Gossett Jr. They are both very good, but saddled with apredictable and sentimental script. If they had been left all alone ontheir barren planet, they might just possibly have arrived at someinteresting story possibilities.Instead, "Enemy Mine" descends to the level of 1930's space operawith the arrival of evil human slave-traders who kidnap Dracs and force them to work in mines. As the slavers stood over their captives withwhips, I found myself wondering how cost-effective it would be to transport manual laborers millions of light years. Surely a technologycapable of arriving at the planet Fyrine IV would have figured out abetter way to mine its ores?Then there are the truly unbelievable moments, as when Quaid'sapparently lifeless body is found by a human spaceship that is neverseen; the cornball moment when he comes back to life; the humanspaceships returning to Fyrine like the cavalry to the rescue, and thefinal idiotic shootout.Were they so bankrupt of ideas, in a movie rich with them, thatthey had to resolve the plot with yet another fistfight and gunfight?By the time the noble, uplifting ending arrived, I'd given up. Here isa movie that made no compromises in its art direction, its specialeffects and its performances - and then compromised everything else insight.
