Enjoyable, civilized, yet somehow not as satisfying as"Persuasion," another recently released Austen adaptation. "Senseand Sensibility" was the first and one of the least of Jane Austen'snovels; she wrote it in 1795, but it was not published for 16 years, until shehad found the courage to declare herself as a novelist. It was written by ayoung woman who ostensibly had little experience of the world - although herfiction proves she missed little that occurred on her domestic stage - and thestory reflects that orientation, as a mother and her three daughters waitpassively while all of the interesting men in the vicinity disappear onunexplained missions to London.Ina modern story, the women would have demanded explanations.Whatgives "Sense and Sensibility" its tension and mystery is that thecharacters rarely say what they mean. There is great gossip within the women'ssphere, but with men, the conversation loops back upon itself in excruciatingeuphemisms, leaving the women to puzzle for weeks over what was or was notsaid.Asthe story opens, the Dashwood estate passes to a stingy male heir, who providesonly a few hundred pounds a year to his father's second wife and her threedaughters. The widow Dashwood (Gemma Jones) and her girls find themselves tornfrom the life of country gentry and forced to live on this meager income in acottage generously supplied by a distant relative.Itis now the task of the girls to find themselves husbands. The oldest, Elinor(Emma Thompson), is no longer in first flower. The middle, Marianne (KateWinslet), is in full bloom. The youngest, Margaret (Emile Francois), is stillat this point largely interested in tree houses, and hiding under tables in thelibrary. The women spend many hours by the fire at their sewing, waiting foreligible men to drift into their nets, and some of the film's funniest momentshave the mother and daughters quickly composing themselves into a tableau ofdomestic bliss just in time for a man to happen upon them.Thefirst man in view is Edward (Hugh Grant), the brother-in-law of the stingyDashwood son. He is charming, and definitely interested in Elinor, but asMarianne observes, "there is something wanting." Exactly what iswanting is explained later in the film, when we discover why Edward isprevented from declaring the full extent of his love.Edwardleaves suddenly for London. The next man to appear is Col. Brandon, played bythat indispensable villain Alan Rickman, who is not a villain this time butseems to be, with his dark, brooding air and the speaking style of asentimental hangman. He is attracted to Marianne, but before he can act, she issmitten by the dashing Willoughby (Greg Wise), who rescues her from a mishapand charms her off her feet. No sooner have these men appeared when they, too,are called away to London - although not before Col. Brandon has suggested,almost by osmosis, that he knows something unspeakable about his rivalWilloughby.Hissecret is the sort of thing that would not be a secret long in the modern age,but in Austen's time, such things were not spoken of, and Brandon might evenallow Marianne to make a disastrous marriage rather than tell her what hermaidenly ears should never hear. This maddening, intriguing inability to simplyblurt out the truth is indispensable to 19th century fiction, and I find itenormously satisfying. Better the character who leaves us to guess atunspeakable depths than one who bores us with confessional psychobabble.Themen's departure to London leaves the three daughters and their mother facing anindefinite future in their sewing circle. So when a kindly relative proposes avisit to London, they seize upon it with desperation, and it is there thatsecrets are revealed and alliances are smashed or formed. The screenplay, adaptedfrom Austen by Emma Thompson, takes wicked delight in setting up scenes thatwould be farce in France a few generations later, but here still play as drama(with an undertone of dry humor). The scene, for example, when the haplessEdward (Grant) finds himself unexpectedly in the presence of two women, neitherone of whom should know about the other."Senseand Sensibility" has been directed by Ang Lee ("The WeddingBanquet," "Eat Drink Man Woman"), who is from Taiwan, and whosechoice for this assignment has been questioned. Yet surely a modernupper-middle-class Chinese person has more familiarity with Austen's varietiesof family ties and marriage responsibilities than a modern Briton. Romance isonly one of the reasons for marriage in Taiwan, where family alliances andsocial class still play a role, while in modern Britain, as in America, younglovers hardly seem to recall their own earlier years, let alone their familytraditions, if any. There are obvious parallels between this story of a motherwho wants to see her girls happily settled and the two earlier Ang Lee films,which were about parents with much the same concerns."Senseand Sensibility" is an enjoyable film, and yet it left me somehowunsatisfied. I liked the wit, I liked the charm of the actors, I enjoyed theway that Rickman chewed his role as if he wanted to make it last, and thetension when Grant's Edward is made to suffer - particularly since he appearsto be a cad only because he has tried to do the right thing. And I appreciated theway Thompson's Elinor kept her character's face carefully expressionless as shenegotiated scenes in which some knew her secrets and others did not.Yetthe film is not told as tightly or as well as "Persuasion," thewonderful Austen adaptation released earlier in 1995. Austen was not yet agreat novelist when she wrote this story, and there is too much contrivance inthe way she dispatches her men to London when she is done with them. Edward is off-screenso long that instead of growing concerned about his absence, we forget him.Theproduction suffers from comparison with "Persuasion" because theearlier film looked simpler and more authentic, and this one seems a little tooidealized; we want notepaper, not picture postcards. "Sense andSensibility" is entertaining and amusing, but "Persuasion" isthe one true Jane Austen lovers will prefer.
