So here it is at last, "Waterworld," two years and$200 million in the making. In the old days in Hollywood, they used to bragabout how much a movie cost. Now they apologize. There's been so much publicityabout this movie's budget that a review of the story seems beside the point; Ishould just print the spreadsheets. Thecost controversy aside, "Waterworld" is a decent futuristic actionpicture with some great sets, some intriguing ideas, and a few images that willstay with me. It could have been more, it could have been better, and it couldhave made me care about the characters. It's one of those marginal picturesyou're not unhappy to have seen, but can't quite recommend.Themovie begins with the trademark Universal globe spinning in space, and then wesee the polar ice cap melting while a deep voice (not James Earl Jones for achange) sets the story in "the future," when all of the Earth iscovered in water. Cut to Mariner (Kevin Costner), aboard his trimaran, a sailingvessel that looks made out of spare parts from "Mad Max." The firstshot of an action hero is supposed to set the tone for a movie; remember yourinitial glimpses of James Bond or Batman, and compare them with"Waterworld," which shows Mariner peeing into a bottle, pouring thefluid into a home-made chemistry set, cranking a handle to process it, and thendrinking it. Then he gargles, and spits on his little lime tree, so we know howhe gets fresh water and vitamin C.Iwould have welcomed more of those details about the global floating culturethat Mariner is a part of. But like so many science fiction movies, this onebypasses the best possibilities of the genre: Instead of science andspeculation, we get a lot of violent action scenes.Marineris a loner, a "mutie," or mutant, with gills behind his ears, andwebbed feet. He goes to trade at a big floating "atoll," which islike a seagoing version of the post-apocalyptic city in "Mad Max BeyondThunderdome." He has something they want."Mmmm!"says a trader. "Pure dirt! 3.2 kilos!" He trades it for cash, spendssome of it at the bar, and meets Helen (Jeanne Tripplehorn), the bartender.Then he offends the locals by refusing to contribute to their gene pool, and islocked in a cage when the fortress comes under attack from Smokers - renegadeoutlaws who prowl the seas in souped-up jet skis.Theleader of the Smokers is Deacon (a chain-smoker, of course), played by DennisHopper as another of his violent cackling loonies. Hopper is the standard-issuevillain of the 1990s, and his appearances would grow tiresome if he weren't sogood at them, adding weird verbal twists that make his characters seem smarterand more twisted.TheSmokers' attack on the atoll is a virtuoso action sequence, including stuntswhere guys on jet skis speed up a ramp and fly over the atoll walls, landing inthe lagoon inside. (It's a little strange to see Hells Angels types doing thesame basic water-ski stunts perfected 50 years ago in all those Esther Williamspictures set at Cypress Gardens.) Mariner is freed by Helen, whose price isthat he must help her and a young girl named Enola (Tina Majorino) escape. He'sforced to agree, and soon they're sailing the high seas and squabbling("This is my boat, and I got it the way I like it"). Mariner wouldjust as soon throw Helen and the girl overboard, but we know the obligatoryoutcome: He'll get to like them. He does, grudgingly, and then discovers theSmokers want the girl because she has a map tattooed on her back that shows theway to land. The relationship scenes are pretty grim, apart from a long-delayedkiss and a breathtaking visit beneath the waves to visit a drowned city.Thereare a lot of amazing props in the movie, including various flying and sailingmachines and medieval; futuristic weapons.Anda few smiles, as when the Deacon's ship turns out to be the Exxon Valdez (witha portrait of Captain Joe Hazelwood still on display). I am not quite sure,however, that I believed the scene where Deacon fires up his men with promisesof dry land, and they all troop down into the hold of the Valdez and startrowing it like a Roman galley.KevinCostner obviously decided to play his character as a poker-faced outsider, notentirely human, and although that's a logical choice it isn't a veryentertaining one; Mel Gibson, in a similar role as Mad Max, went for energy andgood humor, and was more fun. There is also a certain lack of imagination inthe story. These floating people have the whole globe to explore, but they seemto hang out in the same small patch of sea with the same characters. Are theredifferent cultures elsewhere? Different adaptations to the flood? The moviedoesn't care.It'ssaid "Waterworld's" first cut was a good deal longer than its final120-minute running time, and you can sense that occasionally, as when theMariner fights off an attack by the Smokers and then immediately takes Helen onthe trip beneath the sea, when it seems the Smokers must still be in sight. Butbasically the movie plays smoothly as a combination of chases, fights, bizarrelocations, special effects, and the cold, distant, slowly thawing behavior ofMariner toward his passengers. I'll remember some of the sights in"Waterworld" for a long time. But I won't necessarily want to seethem again.
